good evening and welcome to Houston we
are live from Texas Southern University
for tonight's democratic debate that top
10 candidates are here it's going to
start right now and on the stage you see
them they have all met the criteria set
by the Democratic National Committee at
least 10 others have not met the
threshold so for the first time in this
primer a single debate in a single night
with all the top candidates facing off
it is a critical test for candidates and
their campaigns at a critical time for
our country they're gonna lay out their
vision for the country their records
their differences with President Trump
and each other and we're gonna best to
bring you a lively informative and civil
debate I'm joined here tonight by my ABC
colleague will news tonight anchor David
Muir our national correspondent Lindsay
Davis and Jorge Ramos from our partner
Network Univision all right
thank you very much we appreciate the
opportunity to welcome Latinos across
the country and to ask about Latin x
issues too in these challenging times en
este pais
también se habla espanol este Roboto
share a little momentum mood official
para los Latinos and Texas in todo esta
vez una dos tres importante que ellos
saben que sabemos que esta también es
nuestro Pais let me just give you a
little translation here
I'm telling Latinos that despite the
fact that we are facing difficult times
this is our country too we are delighted
to be on the beautiful campus of Texas
Southern University one of the largest
historically black colleges and
universities in the country and here in
the health and physical education
building tonight
we are joined by a live audience of
3,500 people most invited by the
Democratic National Committee and of
course some of the brightest minds of
the student body here at TSU go tiger
[Music]
the rules of this debate are very basic
tonight it have been agreed to by all
the campaigns in advance candidates will
have one minute 15 seconds to answer a
direct question and 45 seconds for a
rebuttal or response as directed by one
of the moderators candidates will each
see green and yellow lights there you
see them right there indicating how much
time they have remaining and when time
is up the light will turn red
candidates who interrupt will be subject
to having their time reduced later on
but this is democracy the great American
experiment and the candidates are here
tonight to make their case the podium
place is based on their current
standings and nationally recognized
elections recognized polls with the
leading candidates in the center all
kennix have been told they can have one
minute to make an opening statement and
we're gonna begin in Reverse polling
order with secretary who Leon Castro
good evening
bienvenidos at the house welcome to
Texas it's great to be here at TSU home
of the Tigers you know on January 20th
2021 at 12:01 p.m. we're gonna have a
Democratic president a Democratic House
and a Democratic Senate there will be
life after Donald Trump but the truth is
that our problems didn't start just with
Donald Trump and we won't solve them by
embracing old ideas we need a bold
vision universal pre-k and universal
health care unleashing millions of new
jobs in the clean energy economy a tax
system that rewards people who have to
work for a living but first we have to
win and that means exciting a young
diverse coalition of Americans who are
ready for a bold future that's what
Kennedy did
it's what Carter did it's what Clinton
did it's what Barack Obama did and it's
what I can do in this race get back
Michigan Wisconsin in Pennsylvania
Florida Georgia and Arizona and finally
turned Texas blue and say goodbye the
Donald Trump
senator klobuchar good evening Texas
Southern I believe that what unites us
up here the 10 of us is much stronger
than what divides us and I think that's
true of our country too now I may not be
the loudest person up here but I think
we've already got that in the White
House houston we have a problem this we
have a guy there that is literally
running our country like a game show he
would rather lie than lead I think we
need something different I am someone
that tells the truth I don't make
promises that I can't keep I have
people's back and I believe that to win
you bring people with you and that is
how you govern as well so you're gonna
hear a lot of ideas up here some will be
great but if you see that some of them
seem a little off track I've got a
better way if you feel stuck in the
middle of the extremes and our politics
and you are tired of the noise and the
nonsense you've got a home with me
because I don't want to be the president
for half of America I want to be the
president for all of America
Congress in better r-ark it's an honor
to be on this debate stage it is
wonderful to be back in Texas in Houston
back here at TSU on August 3rd
you know Paso Texas two things became
crystal clear for me and I think
produced a turning point for this
country the first is just how dangerous
Donald Trump is the cost and the
consequence of his presidency a racism
and violence that had long been a part
of America was welcomed out into the
open and directed to my hometown of El
Paso Texas where 22 people were killed
dozens more grievously injured by a man
carrying a weapon he should never have
been able to buy in the first place
inspired to kill by our President the
second is how insufficient our politics
is to meet the threats that we have
right now the bitterness the pettiness
the smallness of the moment the
incentives to attack one another and try
to make differences without distinctions
mountains out of mole hills we have to
be bigger we have to see clearly we have
to speak honestly and we have to act
decisively that's what I want to do for
you as president of the United States
Thank You senator Cory Booker it was
over 20 years ago that I was a law
student and moved to inner-city Newark
New Jersey to serve as a tenth rights
lawyer to try to address the challenges
in my community and I was sobered by
them the gun violence the substandard
housing but it was my greatest mentor a
woman named Miss Virginia Jones who
challenged me she said boy if all you
see in this neighborhood is problems
that's all there's ever gonna be but if
you're stubborn and defiant and can be
put forth a vision that can unify people
then we can make transformative change
she was a church woman that said without
vision the people will perish well
that's exactly what we did we created
extraordinary unity in our community and
we did things that other people think
thought work was impossible that's the
story of America at our best we unify we
find common cause and common purpose the
differences amongst us Democrats on the
stage
or not as great as the urgency for us to
unite as a party not just to beat Donald
Trump but to unite America in common
cause and common purpose that's why I'm
running for president and that's how I
will lead this nation entrepreneur
Andrew yang in America today everything
revolves around the almighty dollar our
schools our hospitals our media even our
government it's why we don't trust our
institutions anymore we have to get our
country working for us again instead of
the other way around we have to see
ourselves as the owners and shareholders
of this democracy rather than inputs
into a giant machine when you donate
money to a presidential campaign what
happens the politician spends the money
on TV ads and consultants and you hope
it works out it's time to trust
ourselves more than our politicians
that's why I'm going to do something
unprecedented tonight my campaign will
now give a freedom dividend of $1,000 a
month for an entire year to ten American
families someone watching this at home
right now if you believe that you can
solve your own problems better than any
politician go to yang 2020 calm and tell
us how $1,000 a month will help you do
just that this is how we will get our
country working for us again the
American people
[Music]
mayor P Buda judge its original I'll
give you that the American people are
divided and doubtful at the very moment
we need to rise to some of the greatest
challenges we've ever seen as a mayor of
an industrial city coming back from the
brink as a veteran of the war in
Afghanistan I know what's at stake in
our national leadership we keep sending
politicians to Washington asking them to
fight for us but then when they get
there they seem more interested in the
part about fighting than the part about
us good politics is supposed to be not
about the day-to-day fights of the
politicians but about the day-to-day
lives of Americans we just mark the
anniversary of 9/11 all day today I've
been thinking about September 12th the
way it felt when for a moment we came
together as a country imagine if we had
been able to sustain that unity imagine
what would be possible right now with
ideas that are bold enough to meet the
challenges of our time but big enough as
well that they could unify the American
people
that's what presidential leadership can
do that's what the presidency is for and
that is why I'm asking for your vote
senator Kamala Harris thank you it's
great to be back at TSU so I plan on
spending tonight talking with you about
my plans to address the problems that
keep you up at night but first I have a
few words for Donald Trump who we all
know is watching so president Trump you
spent the last two-and-a-half years
full-time trying to sow hate and
division among us as and that is why
we've got nothing done you have used
hate intimidation fear and over 12,000
lies as a way to distract from your
failed policies and your broken promises
the only reason you've not been indicted
is because there was a memo and the
Department of Justice that says the
sitting president cannot be charged with
a crime but here's what you don't get
what you don't get is that the American
people are so much better than this and
we know that the vast majority of us
have so much more in common than what
separates us regardless of our race
where we live or the party with which
were registered to vote and I plan on
focusing on our common issues our common
hopes and desires and in that way
unifying our country winning this
election and turning the page for
America and now president Trump you can
go back to watching Fox News
senator bernie sanders senator sanders
let me be blunt and tell you what you
don't hear much about in congress or in
the media and that is it goes without
saying that we must and will defeat
trump the most dangerous president in
the history of this country what we must
do more we must do more we have got to
recognize that this country is moving
into an oligarchic form of society where
a handful of billionaires control the
economic and political life of this
country and as president i am prepared
to take them on yes we will raise the
minimum wage to a living wage yes we
will finally make sure that every
American has health care as a human
right not a privilege and yes we will
address the catastrophic crisis of
climate change and transform our energy
system away from fossil fuel senator
Elizabeth Warren so I was born and
raised in Oklahoma but I'm sure glad to
be in Texas tonight all three of my
brothers served in military bases here
in Texas that was their ticket to the
middle class me I got my big opportunity
about a half mile down the road from
here at the University of Houston back
when it cost $50 a semester
for a price that I could pay for on a
part-time waitressing job I got to
finish my 4-year degree and I became a
special needs teacher and after law
school my first big job was back here in
Houston by then I had two little kids
and when childcare nearly brought me
down my Aunt Bea moved in and saved us
all the path to America's middle class
have gotten a lot smaller and a lot
narrower today service members are
preyed upon by predatory lenders
students are crushed by debt and
Families cannot afford child care I know
what's broken I know how to fix it and
I'm gonna lead the fight to get it done
Vice President Joe Biden
you know I'm President Kennedy announced
the moonshot he used the phrase that
sticks in me my whole life
he said we're doing it because we refuse
to postpone well I refuse to postpone
one more minute spending billions of
dollars on curing cancer Alzheimer's and
other diseases which if we invest in
them we can find cures I refuse to
postpone giving every single child in
America no matter of their zip code
pre-k all the way through high school
and beyond
I refuse to postpone any longer taking
on climate change and leading the world
in taking on climate change look this is
the United States of America there's
never been a single solitary time when
we've set our mind to something we were
not able to do it we're walking around
their heads down like woe is me we're
the best-equipped nation in the world to
take this on it's no longer time to
postpone we should get moving there's
enormous enormous opportunities once we
get rid of Donald Trump
candidates thank you some review said
you are more United than dividing that
is certainly true all of you agree on
one big thing the goal of defeating
President Trump driving the country in a
new direction but out on the campaign
trail you have outlined big differences
over how far to go and how fast to go
and Vice President Biden the differences
between you and the senators on either
side of you tonight strike at the heart
of this primary debate both senators
Warren and Sanders want to replace
Obamacare with Medicare for all you want
to build on Obamacare and not scrap it
they propose spending far more than you
to combat climate change and tackle
student loan debt and they would raise
more in taxes than you to pay for their
programs our senators Warren and Sanders
pushing too far beyond where Democrats
want to go and where the country needs
to go that would be for the voters to
decide that question let me tell you
what I think I think we should have a
debate on health care I think I know
that the senator says she's for Bernie
well I'm for Barack I think the
Obamacare worked I think the way in
Austin we add to it replace everything
that's been cut at a public option
guarantee that everyone will be able to
have affordable assurance number one
number two I think we should be in a
position of taking a look at what costs
are my plan for health care costs a lot
of money it cost seven hundred forty
billion dollars it doesn't cost $30
three point four trillion a year turns
out is twice what the entire federal
budget is that's before it exists now
without interest on the debt how are we
going to pay for it I want to hear
tonight how that's happened so far my
distinguished friend the senator on my
left does not has not indicated how she
pays for it and the senator has in fact
come forward and said how he's going to
pay for it but it gets about halfway
there there's a lot of other things that
need to be done I tried a bold plan to
deal with making sure we triple the
money for at-risk schools that are a
title one schools from 40 from 15 to 45
billion dollars a year but I go down the
line and each the things we're talking
about I lay out how I can pay for it how
I can get it done and why it's better
senator Warren let me let me take that
to you particularly on what senator
Biden was saying there about health
grades actually praise Bernie Sanders
for being candid about his health care
plan that Senator says that senator
Sanders has been candid about the fact
that middle-class taxes are going to go
up and most of private surance is going
to be eliminated will you make that same
admission so let's be clear about health
care and let's actually start where Vice
President did we all owe a huge debt to
President Obama who fundamentally
transformed health care in America and
committed this country to health care
for everything day and now the question
is how best can we improve on it and I
believe the best way we can do that is
we make sure that everybody gets covered
by health care at the lowest possible
cost how do we pay for it we pay for it
those at the very top the richest
individuals and the biggest corporations
are going to pay more and middle-class
families are going to pay less that's
how this is going to work direct
question you said middle-class families
are gonna pay less but will middle-class
taxes go up to pay for the program I
know you believe that the deductibles
and the premiums will go down will
middle-class taxes go up will private
insurance be eliminated look what
families have to deal with is cost total
cost that's what they have to deal with
and understand families are paying for
their health care today families pay
every time an insurance company says
sorry you can't see that specialist
sorry that doctor is out of network
sorry we are not covering that
prescription families are paying every
time they don't get a prescription
filled because they can't pay for it
they don't have a lump checked out
because they can't afford the copay what
we're talking about here is what's going
to happen in family's pockets what's
going to happen in their budgets and the
answer is on Medicare for all costs are
going to go up for wealthier individuals
and costs are going to go up for giant
corporations but for hardworking
families across this country costs are
going to go down and that's how it
should work under
medicare-for-all in our healthcare
senator Sanders you were invoked by the
vice president also take on that
question about taxes Medicare for all
the costs over thirty trillion dollars
that's right Joe status-quo over ten
years will be fifty trillion dollars
every study done shows that Medicare for
all is the most cost effective approach
to providing health care to every man
woman and child in this country I who
wrote the damn bill if I may say so
intend to eliminate all out-of-pocket
expenses or deductibles or co-payments
nobody in America will pay more than two
hundred dollars a year for prescription
drugs because we're going to stand up to
the greed and corruption and price
fixing of the pharmaceutical industry we
need we need a health care system that
guarantees health care to all people as
every other major country does not a
system which provides a hundred billion
dollars a year in profit for the drug
companies and the insurance companies
and tell you how absurd the system is
tonight on ABC the health care industry
will be advertising telling you how bad
Medicare for all this because they want
to protect their profits that is absurd
nine George
you get the you get a response then
we're gonna broaden out the disco no one
my health care plan does significantly
cut the cost of largest out-of-pocket
payment you'll pay is a thousand dollars
you'll be able to get into a anyone who
can't afford it gets automatically
enrolled in the in the Medicare type
option we have etcetera but guess what
of the hundred and sixty million people
who like their health care now they can
keep it if they don't like it they can
leave number one number two the fact of
the matter is we're in a situation where
if you notice you hadn't answered the
question this is about candor honesty
big ideas let's have a big idea
yeah the the tax of 2% the Senators
talking about that raised about three
billion dollars guess what that leaves
you about twenty eight billion dollars
short the senator said before it's going
to cost you in your page there will be a
deductible in your paycheck you're going
to the middle class person someone
making sixty grand with three kids
they're gonna end up paying five
thousand dollars more
they're gonna end up paying four percent
more on their income tax that's a
reality now it's not a bad idea if you
like it
I don't like it okay now I went
everybody keeps at the time but you
didn't vote both senators I have to get
responses to then Senator Warren you go
first so let's be clear I've actually
never met anybody who likes their health
insurance company I've met people who
like their doctors I've met people who
like their nurses I've met people who
like their pharmacist I like met people
who like their physical therapists what
they want is access to health care and
we just need to be clear about what
Medicare for all is all about instead of
paying premiums into insurance companies
and then having insurance companies
build their profits by saying no to
coverage we're going to do this by
saying everyone is covered by Medicare
for all every health care provider is
covered and the only question here in
terms of difference is where to send the
bill senator Sanders let us be clear Joe
in the United States of America we are
spending twice as much per capita on
health care as the Canadians or any
other major country on earth this
American yeah but Americans don't want
to pay twice as much as other countries
and they guarantee health care to all
people under my medicare-for-all
proposal when you don't pay
out-of-pocket and you don't pay premiums
maybe you'll run into people who love
their premiums I have it what people
want is cost effective health care
Medicare for all will save the average
Americans substantial sums of money on
his or her health care bill senator
Klobuchar you said in your opening
statement you don't you want to
represent the people stuck in the middle
of the extremes who represents the
extreme on this
I think you know that I don't agree with
some of these proposals up here George
so I'm talking about if I could if I
could respond to some of the proposals
but from my friends first of all senator
Sanders and I have worked valiantly to
bring down the cost of pharmaceuticals
that was a Clovis Shar Sanders amendment
to allow for drugs to come in from less
expensive countries like Canada we have
worked to bring down the cost by
fighting to allow 43 million seniors
that's a bow I lead to negotiate for
better prices under Medicare I figure
that's a lot of seniors and they should
be allowed to get a better price but
when it comes to our health care and
what comes to our premiums I go with the
doctor's Creed which is do no harm and
while Bernie wrote the bill I read the
bill and on page 8 on page 8 of the bill
it says that we will no longer have
private insurance as we know it and that
means that 149 million Americans will no
longer be able to have their current
insurance that's in four years I don't
think that's a bold idea I think it's a
bad idea and what I favor is something
that what Barack Obama wanted to do from
the very beginning and that is a public
option a nonprofit choice that will
bring down the cost of insurance cover
12 million more people and bring down
the prices for 13 million more people
that is a bold idea Senator Warren
149 people will lose their health
insurance I'm sorry she said page a to
the bill 149 people will lose their
health insurance what current health
insurer 49 million million excuse me so
let's be clear about this people will
have access to all of their doctors all
of their nurses their community
hospitals their rural hospitals doctors
won't have to hire people to fill out
crazy forms they won't have to spend
time on the phone arguing with insurance
companies people who have sick family
members won't have to get into these
battles what this is about is making
sure that we have the most efficient way
possible to pay for health care for
everyone in this country
insurance companies last year sucked
twenty three billion dollars in profits
out of the system how did they make that
money every one of those twenty three
billion dollars was made by an insurance
companies saying no to your health care
cut yeah boo to judgment the problem
senator Sanders with that damn bill that
you wrote and that Senator Warren backs
is that it doesn't trust the American
people I trust you to choose what makes
the most sense for you not my way or the
highway now look I think we do have to
go far beyond tinkering with the ACA I
proposed Medicare for all who want it we
take a version of Medicare we make it
available for the American people and if
we're right as progressives that that
public alternative is better then the
American people will figure that out for
themselves
I trust the American people to make the
right choice for them why don't you
senator Sanders 45 seconds George you
talked about 150 million people on
private insurance 15 million of those
people lose their private insurance
every year when they quit their jobs or
they go unemployed or their employer
changes their insurance policy Medicare
for all is comprehensive health care
covers all basic needs including home
health
yeah it allows you to go to any doctor
you want which many private insurance
company programs do not so if you want
comprehensive health care freedom of
choice regarding doctor or hospital no
more than $200 a year for prescription
drugs
taking on the drug companies and the
insurance companies moving to medicare
for all is a way to go senator Harris
you started out co-sponsoring senator
Sanders bill you now say you're
uncomfortable with it why I want to give
credit first to Barack Obama for really
bringing us this far we would not be
here if he hadn't the courage the talent
or the will to see us this far I want to
give credit to burning take credit
Bernie you you know you brought us this
far in Medicare for all I support
Medicare for all I always have but I
wanted to make the plan better which I
did which is about offering people
choice not taking that from them so
under my medicare-for-all plan people
have the choice of a private plan or a
public plan because that's what people
want and I agree we shouldn't take
choice from people but here's the thing
everybody on this stage I do believe is
well-intentioned and wants that all
Americans have coverage and recognizes
that right now 30 million Americans
don't have coverage but at least five
people have talked some repeatedly on
this subject and not once have we talked
about Donald Trump so let's talk about
the fact that Donald Trump came into
office and spent almost the entire first
year of his term trying to get rid of
the Affordable Care Act we all fought
against it and then the late great John
McCain at that moment at about two
o'clock in the morning killed his
attempt
take healthcare from millions of people
in this country fast forward to today
and what is happening Donald Trump's
Department of Justice is trying to get
rid of the Affordable Care Act Donald
Trump's administration is trying to get
rid of the the ban that we placed on
undeniable Trump is trying to say that
our kids up to the age of 26 can no
longer be on our plans and frankly I
think this discussion is given the
American public a headache what they
want to know is that they're gonna have
health care and cost will not be a
barrier to getting it but let's focus on
the end goal if we don't get Donald
Trump out of office he's gonna get rid
of all of it seconds 15 seconds let me
get to Carson over work and then bring
you'll go ahead and 15 seconds look
everybody says you want an option the
option I'm proposing is a Medicare for
all
in Medicare for choice if you want
Medicare if you lose the job from your
insurance company your employer you
automatically can buy into this you
don't have no pre-existing condition can
stop you from buying it you get covered
period and if you notice nobody's yet
said how much it's gonna cost the
taxpayer I hear this large savings the
president think my friend Vermont thinks
that the employer is going to give you
back if you negotiate his union all
these years got a cut in wages because
you got insurance they're gonna give
back that money to the employee matter
of fact they will well let me tell you
something for socialists you got it you
it for a socialist you got a lot more
confidence in corporate America than I
do
by senator Sanders George go ahead all
right two points you got to defend the
fact that today not only do we have 87
million people uninsured and
underinsured you got to defend the fact
that 500,000 Americans are going
bankrupt you know why they're going
bankrupt because they suffered a
terrible disease cancer or heart disease
under my legislation people will not go
into financial ruin
because they suffered
with the diagnosis of cancer and our
program it's the only one that does that
I know a lot of our cancer let me tell
you something it's personal to me let me
tell you something every single person
who's diagnosed with cancer or any other
disease can automatically become part of
this plan they will not go bankrupt
because of that they will not go
bankrupt because that they can join
immediately and we're talking four six
eight ten years depending you talked
about before we get to Medicare for all
come on I've been there you've been
there you know what it's like people
need help now hope now and do something
now kind of Center would yeah thank you
listen I'm grateful that we all agree
about the urgency of this challenge and
the fact that Donald Trump is
undermining the limited protections that
we have right now but I also think we're
being offered a false choice between
those who propose an all-or-nothing
gambit forcing tens of millions off of
insurance that they like that works for
them to force them on Medicare and
others who want to as a vice president
does incrementally improve what we have
which will still leave many maybe
millions uninsured and uncared-for in a
state like Texas where the largest
provider of mental health care services
is a county jail system we've got to do
better in my proposal Medicare for
America says everyone who's uninsured
will be enrolled in Medicare everyone
who's in sufficiently insured cannot
afford it can move over to Medicare and
those like members of unions who fought
for the health care plans that work for
them and their families are able to keep
them that is the best possible path
there is the top issue for everyone in
the country I want to make sure everyone
gets one minute to respond to comments
senator secretary Castro Andrew Yang and
then senator senator Booker you thank
you and you know I also want to
recognize the work that Bernie has done
on this and of course we owe a debt of
gratitude to President Barack Obama now
of course I also work for President
Obama a Vice President Biden and I know
that the problem with your plan is that
it leaves 10 million people uncovered
now on the last debate stage in Detroit
you said that wasn't true when senator
Harris brought that up there was a fact
check of that and they said that was
true you know I grew up with a
grandmother who had type 2 diabetes and
I watched her condition get worse and
worse but that whole time she had
Medicare I want every single American
family to have a strong Medicare plan
available if they choose to hold on to
strong solid private health insurance I
believe they should be able to do that
but the difference between what I
support and what you support Vice
President Biden is that you require them
to opt in and I would not require them
to opt in they would automatically be
enrolled they wouldn't have to buy in
that's a big difference because Barack
Obama's vision was not to leave 10
million people uncovered he wanted every
single person in this country covered my
plan would do that your plan would you
do not have to buy in they do not have
to buy you just said that you just said
that two minutes ago you just said two
minutes ago that they would have to buy
in you said they would have to buy to
buy in if Spalla fire you are you
forgetting what you said of Maddox and
being four
what you said just two minutes ago I
mean I can't believe that you said two
minutes ago that they had to buy in and
now you're saying they don't have to buy
you're forgetting that look grandmother
who has no money she will automatically
and radically enrolls people regardless
of whether they choose to opt in or not
if you lose your job for instance his
his health care plan would not
automatically enroll you you would have
to opt in my health care plan would
that's a big difference I'm fulfilling
in fulfilling the legacy of Barack Obama
and you're not I would be surprised to
him Andrew yang this is why presidential
debates are becoming unwatchable
this reminds everybody of what they
cannot stand about Washington scoring
points against each other kind of poking
at each other and telling each other
that you're my plan your play look we
all know that's called the Democratic
primary election
[Applause]
it's an election but a hundred house
divided cannot stand that is not how we
know we're on the same team here
we know we're the same team we all have
a better vision for healthcare than our
current president and I believe we're
talking about this the wrong way as
someone who has run a business I know
that our current health care system
makes it harder to hire people makes it
harder to give them benefits and treat
them as full-time employees you instead
pretend they're contractors it's harder
to change jobs it's certainly harder to
start a business the pitch we have to
make the American people is we will get
the health care weight off of your backs
and then unleash the hopes and dreams of
the American people senator I am Asian
so I know a lot of doctors and they tell
me that they spend a lot of time on
paperwork avoiding being sued and
navigating the insurance bureaucracy we
have to change the incentives so instead
of revenue and activity people are
focused on our health in the healthcare
system and the Cleveland Clinic where
they're paid not based upon how many
procedures they prescribe shocker they
prescribed fewer procedures and patient
health stays the same or improves that
is the pitch the American people senator
Booker closed out this discussion thank
you very much there are a lot of people
watching at home right now listening to
us that are afraid because they are in
crisis they don't have health insurance
their health insurance doesn't go far
enough they can't afford their
prescription drugs
look I'm clearing what I believe I
believe in Medicare for all I believe
it's the best way to rationalize the
system but dear God I know that every
one of my colleagues on this stage is in
favor of universal health coverage and
comes at this with the best of
intentions and I'll tell you there is an
urgency right now in this nation
everybody feels it and as a person who
has an ideal I know we cannot sacrifice
progress on the altar of purity because
people in my community they need help
right now they have high blood pressure
right now they have unaffordable insulin
right now and this must be a moment
where we as Democrats can begin to show
that we can not only stake and stand our
ground but find common ground because
we've got one shot to make Donald Trump
a one-term
president and we cannot lose it by the
way we talk about each other or demonize
and degrade each other we can walk and
chew gum at the same time if I am the
leader I will work toward the ideal of
health insurance health coverage being a
right for all Americans but every single
day I'll join with other Democrats to
make progress happen in our nation for
the people that are struggling and
suffering today candidates Thank You
Lindsey Davis thanks George
since we're here at an HBCU I'd like to
start with young black voters several
recent polls indicate their number one
concern is racism this campus this state
and this nation are still raw from that
racially motivated attack on Latinos in
El Paso now we know that the racial
divide started long before President
Trump and President Obama but each of
you on this stage has said that
President Trump has made that divide
worse
congressman O'Rourke coming to you first
why are you the most qualified candidate
to address this divide you know I called
this out in no uncertain terms on August
third and every day since then and I was
talking about it long before then as
well racism in America is endemic it is
foundational we can mark the creation of
this country not at the 4th of July 1776
but August 20th 1619 when the first
kidnapped African was brought to this
country against his will and in bondage
and as a slave built the greatness and
the success and the wealth that neither
he nor his descendants would ever be
able to fully participate in and enjoy
we have to be able to answer this
challenge and it is found in our
education system where in Texas a
five-year-old child in kindergarten is
five times as likely to be disciplined
or suspended or expelled based on the
color of their skin in our health care
system where there is a maternal
mortality crisis three times as deadly
for women of color or the fact that
there's 10 times the wealth in white
America than there is in black America
I'm gonna follow Sheila Jackson leaves
lead and sign into law a reparations
bill that will allow us to address this
but we will also call out the fact that
we have a white supremacist in the White
House and he poses a mortal threat to
people of color all across this country
[Applause]
I want to commend bethlo for how well he
has spoken to the the passion and the
frustration and the sadness after what
happened in his hometown of El Paso he's
done a great job with that look a few
weeks ago a shooter drove 10 miles
inspired by this 10 hours inspired by
this President to kill people who look
like me and people who look like my
family white supremacy is a growing
threat to this country and we have to
root it out I'm proud that I put forward
a plan to disarm hate I'm also proud
that I was the first to put forward a
police reform plan because we're not
going to have anymore
laQuan McDonald's or Eric Garner's or
Michael Browns or Pamela Turner's or
Walter Scott's or Sandra bland here from
the Houston area we need to root out
racism and I believe that we can do that
because that doesn't represent the vast
majority of Americans who do have a good
heart they also need a leader to match
that and I will be a president that
matches that senator Booker you have
said quote the real question isn't who
is or isn't a racist it's who's going to
do something about it senator what do
you plan to do about it
well first and foremost I want to hit
that point because we know Donald
Trump's a racist but there is no red bag
of courage for calling in that race is
amygz ist's the question isn't who in
who isn't a racist it's who is and isn't
doing something about racism and this is
not just an issue that started yesterday
it's not just an issue that we hear a
president that can't condemn white
supremacy
we have systemic racism that is eroding
our nation from health care to the
criminal justice system and it's nice to
go all the way back to slavery but dear
God we have a criminal justice system
that is so racially biased we have more
african-americans under criminal
supervision today than all the slaves in
1850 we have to come at this issue
attacking systemic racism having the
courage to call it out and having a plan
to do something about it if I am
President of the United States we will
create an office in the White House to
deal with the problem of white supremacy
and hate crimes and we will make sure
that systemic racism is dealt with in
substantive plans from criminal justice
reform to the disparities in health care
to even one that we don't talk about
enough which is the racism that we see
in environmental injustice and
communities of color all around this
country in your own community you've
also said that anyone who votes to
reelect President Trump is at best
looking the other way on racism does
that sort of talk alienate voters and
potentially deepen divisions in our
country I believe what's deepen
divisions in the country is the conduct
of this President and we have a chance
to change all of that
look systemic racism preceded this
president and even when we defeat him it
will be with us that's why we need a
systemic approach to dismantle it it's
it's not enough to just take a racist
policy replace it with a neutral one and
expect things will just get better on
their own harms compound in the same way
that a dollar saved compound so does a
dollar stolen and we know that the
generational theft of the descendants of
slaves is part of why everything from
housing to education to health to
employment basically puts us in two
different countries I have proposed the
most comprehensive vision to tackle
systemic racism in every one of these
areas marshaling as many resources as
went into the Marshall Plan that rebuilt
Europe but this time a Douglass plan
that we invest right here at home to
make sure that we're not only dealing
with things like the over incarceration
of black Americans but also black
solutions entrepreneurship raising to 25
percent the target for the federal
government to do business with
minority-owned businesses investing in
HBCUs that are training and educating
the next generation of entrepreneurs we
can and must do that but that means
transcending this framework that pits us
against each other that pits a single
black mother of three against a
displaced auto worker because when I
come where I come from a lot of times
that displaced auto worker is a single
black mother of three we've got to say
that and bring people together also a
concern for people of color is criminal
justice reform senator Harris you
released your plan for that just this
week and it does contradict some of your
prior
positions among them you used to oppose
the legalization of marijuana now you
don't you used to oppose outside
investigations and police shootings
now you don't you've said that you've
changed on these and other things
because you were quote swimming against
the current and thankfully the currents
have changed but when you had the power
why didn't you try to effect change then
there have been
there have been I'm glad you asked me
this question and there have been many
distortions of my record let me be very
clear I made a decision to become a
prosecutor for two reasons
one I've always wanted to protect people
and keep them safe and second I was born
knowing about how this criminal justice
system in America has worked in a way
that has been informed by racial bias
and I could tell you extensively about
the experiences I and my family members
have personally had but I made a
decision that if I was going to have the
ability to reform the system I would try
to do it from the inside and so I took
on the position that allowed me without
asking permission to create one of the
first in the nation the initiatives that
was a model and became a national model
around people who were arrested for
drugs and getting them jobs I created
one of the first in the nation
requirements that a state law
enforcement agency would have to wear
cameras and keep them on full-time I
created one of the first in the nation
trainings for police officer on the
issue of racial bias and the need to
reform the system was I able to get
enough done absolutely not but my plan
has been described by activists as being
a bold and comprehensive plan that is
about ending mass incarceration about
taking the profit out of the criminal
justice system I plan on shutting down
for-profit prisons on day one it will be
about what we need to do to hold law
enforcement including prosecutors
accountable and finally my plan is about
making sure that in America's criminal
justice system we D incarcerate women
and children that we end solitary
confinement and that we work on keeping
families intact and as president of the
United States knowing the system from
the inside I will have the ability to be
an effective leader and get this job
complete thank you senator Harris
senator Klobuchar
eight years as a prosecutor in Minnesota
there were dozens of incidents where
black men were killed by police critics
say that too often you sided with police
in these cases the ACLU is legal
director in Minnesota has said that you
showed no interest in racial justice
do you wish now that you had done more
that's not my record we are here at a
historically black college and I think
of an alum of that college Barbara
Jordan in something that she once said
she said what the people want is simple
they want a country as good as its
promise and that same can be said of the
criminal justice system so when I was
there the way we handled these police
shootings I actually took a stand to
make sure outside investigators handled
them I took on our major police chief in
Minneapolis but in the prosecutor's
office they were handled with the grand
jury that's how they were all handled
across our state I now believe it is
better for accountability if the
prosecutor handles them and makes those
decisions herself that aside I am proud
of the work our staff did for hundred
people in our office the cases that came
to us african-american community that
came to us they said there was no
justice for their little kids there was
a kid named Byron Phillips that was shot
on his front porch no one had bothered
to figure out who did it when I came
into that office we worked with the
community groups we put up billboards we
found the shooter and we put him in jail
we did the same for the killer of a
little girl named Aisha Edwards who was
doing her homework at her kitchen table
and was shot through the window what
changes did we make go after
white-collar crimes in a big way
diversify the office in a big way work
with the Innocence Project to make sure
we do much better with eyewitness ID and
as a senator and as your president I
will make sure that we don't just do the
first-step Act when it comes to criminal
sentencing that we move to the second
step Act which means the 90% of people
that are incarcerated in local and state
jails let's reduce those sentences for
nonviolent offenders and let's get them
jobs and let them vote when they get out
of prison thank you
you all believe that the war on drugs
has put too many Americans behind bars
Vice President Biden do you have a plan
to release many nonviolent drug
offenders from prison senator Booker
says that your plan is not ambitious
enough your response first of all let me
say that when I came back from law
school I had a job with a great a big
time law firm and left and became a
public defender because my state was
under siege when dr. King was
assassinated
we were occupied by the National Guard
for ten months I've been involved in
beginning as a young congressman as
young a councilman I introduced
legislation to try to keep them putting
a sewer plant in the poor neighborhood I
made sure that we did deal with
redlining banks should have to lend
where they operate etc the fact of the
matter is that what's happened is that
we're in a situation now where there are
so many people who are in jail and
shouldn't be in jail the whole means by
which this should change is the whole
model has to change we should be talking
about rehabilitation nobody should be in
jail for a non-violent crime as when we
were in the White House would release
36,000 people from the federal prison
system nobody should be in jail for a
drug problem they should be going
directly to a rehabilitator billet ation
centers not prisons we I'm the guy that
put in the the drug courts to divert
people from the criminal justice system
and so we have to change the whole way
we look at this and we put people in
prison we have to equip them that when
they get out nobody who got in prison
for marijuana for example immediately
upon being released they shouldn't be in
there for mister that should be a
misdemeanor they should be out and their
record should be expunged every single
rights should be returned when you
finish your term in prison you should be
able not only vote but have access to
Pell grants have access to be able to
get housing have access to be able to
move along the way I've laid out a
detailed plan along those lines and the
fact is we've learned so much more
senator Booker 45 seconds to respond um
our criminal justice has been so
savagely broken there's no difference in
America between blacks whites and
Latinos for using drugs or dealing drugs
but if you're african-american you're
almost four times more likely to be
arrested and incarcerated destroying
your life
and so much of this comes down to
privilege we have a criminal justice
system that Brian Stevenson says treats
you better if you're rich and guilty
than if you're a poor and innocent and
so I have challenged this whole field we
can specifically and demonstratively now
show that there are 17,000 people
unjustly incarcerated in America and all
of us should come forward and say when
we are present in the United States when
I am president I states we will release
them and let me be specific I joined
together and led in the United States
Senate the only major bipartisan bill
passed under this present for criminal
justice reform that has already led to
thousands of people coming out of jail
if 87 members of the United States
Senate says that these sentences are way
too long and we changed it but we didn't
make it retroactive we could literally
point to the people that are in jail
unjustly right now everyone on this
stage should say that we are going to
give clemency to these 17,000 people and
I challenge you don't just say big
statement back it up with details of the
people in prison right now looking for
one of the most sacrosanct ideals of
this nation which is liberty and freedom
we need to reform this system and we
must do it now every day thank you
lindsay i want to turn to the deadly
mass shootings here in this country and
of course we are all mindful tonight of
where we stand we are here in texas
tonight where 29 people have lost their
lives in just the last month alone el
paso which we've discussed in odessa and
I know there are survivors from El Paso
right here in the hall tonight
Vice President Biden I do want to direct
this to you because we all remember
Sandy Hook 26 people died in that school
20 of them children those first graders
would be in eighth grade today at the
time there was a groundswell in this
country to get something done President
Obama asked you to leave the push for
gun control you have often pointed to
your ability to reach across the aisle
to get things done but four months after
Sandy Hook a measure to require expanded
background checks died on the Senate
floor if you couldn't get it done after
Sandy Hook why should voters give you
another chance done before I'm the only
one up here's ever beat the NRA only one
ever beginner and nationally I'm the guy
that brought the Brady Bill in the
in the focus and became law and so
that's number one number two after Sandy
Hook a number of things happen
it went from a cause to a movement look
what's happened now mother's the
organization Mothers Against Violence
this in what gun violence we've seen
what's happened again now we have all
these young people marching on
Washington making sure that things are
going to change there has been a sea
change those proposals I put forward for
the president had over 50% of gonna of
gun of members of the NRA supporting
them and overwhelmingly the rest of the
people supporting him now the numbers
are much higher because they realize
what I've been saying and we've all been
saying is correct over 90% of the
American people think we have to get
assault weapons off the street period
and we have to get buybacks and get them
out of their basements though so the
point is things have changed and things
have changed a lot and now what's
happening is and by the way the way beto
handle excuse me for saying better with
congressman that's all right that's as
good way he handled what happened in his
hometown is meaningful but look in the
eyes of those people to see those kids
to understand those parents you
understand the hardened but this we are
all ready to do this mr. vice president
you did bring up assault weapons here
and many of you on this stage that
talked about executive order senator
Harris you have said that you would take
executive action on guns within your
first 100 days including banning imports
of ar-15 assault weapons that's right
President Obama after Sandy Hook more
than 23 executive actions and yet here
we all are today in recent days former
Vice President Biden has said about
executive orders some really talented
people are seeking the nomination
they said I'm going to issue an
executive order Biden saying there's no
constitutional authority to issue that
executive order when they say I'm going
to eliminate assault weapon saying you
can't do it by executive order any more
than Trump can do things when he says he
can do it by executive order does the
vice president have a point there some
things you can many things you can't
let's let the senator answer well I mean
I would just say hey Joe it said as
saying no we can't let's say yes we can
[Laughter]
because I'll tell you something the way
that I think about this is I've seen
more autopsy photographs than I care to
tell you I have attended more police
officer funerals than I care to tell you
I have hugged more mothers of homicide
victims than I care to tell you and the
idea that we would wait for this
Congress which has just done nothing to
act it's just
it is it is overlooking the fact that
every day in America our babies are
going to school to have drills
elementary middle and high school
students where they are learning about
how they have to hide in a closet or
crouched in a corner if there is a mass
shooter roaming the hallways of their
school I was talking about this at one
of my town halls
and-and-and-and this child it was eight
years old probably came up to me it was
like it was a secret between the two of
us and he tucked on my jacket and he
said I had to have one of those drills
it is traumatizing our children El Paso
and Beit Oh God love you for standing so
courageously in the midst of that
tragedy you know people asked me in El
Paso they said you know cuz I have a
long-standing record on this issue they
said well do you think Trump um is
responsible for what happened and I said
well look I mean obviously he didn't
pulled the trigger but he's certainly
been tweeting out the ammunition Harris
Thank You vice president Godwin do you
still stand by what you said on an
executive who said was the question
speak to constitutional scholars if in
fact we could say by the way you can't
own the following weapons period it
cannot be sold anymore check with
constitutional scholars I'm gonna I'm
gonna work down the road here but I do
want to come to congressmen or work
because I know this is personal to you
El Paso is your hometown
some on this stage have suggested a
voluntary buyback for guns in this
country you've gone further you said
quote Americans who own ar-15s and
ak-47s will have to sell them to the
government all of them you know the
critics call this confiscation are you
proposing taking away their guns and how
would this work I am if it's a weapon
that was designed to kill people on a
battlefield
if the high-impact high-velocity round
when it hits your body shreds everything
inside of your body because it was
designed to do that
so that you would bleed to death on a
battlefield not be able to get up and
kill one of our soldiers when we see
that being used against children and in
Odessa I met the mother of a 15 year old
girl who was shot by an ar-15 and that
mother watched her bleed to death over
the course of an hour because so many
other people were shot by that ar-15 in
Odessa in Midland there weren't enough
ambulances to get to them in time
hell yes we're gonna take your ar-15
your ak-47
I'm listening to the people of this
country the day after I proposed doing
that I went to a gun show in Conway
Arkansas to meet with those who are
selling ar-15s and ak-47s and those who
are buying those weapons and you might
be surprised there was some common
ground there folks who said I would
willingly give that up cut it to pieces
I don't need this weapon to hunt to
defend myself it is a weapon of war so
let's do the right thing but let's bring
everyone in America into the
conversation Republicans Democrats gun
owners and non-gun owners alike make a
point on Richmond thank you I want to
bring in senator Klobuchar on this
because you've often talked about your
uncle and the proud hunters back home in
Minnesota so I wanted to get your
response to congressman or work tonight
where do you stand on mandatory gun
buybacks
I so appreciate what the congressman's
been doing and I want to remind people
here that what unites us is so much
bigger than what divides us everyone up
here favors an assault weapon ban
everyone up here favors magazine
limitations which by the way would have
made a huge difference that that was in
place in El Paso in that store where all
those ordinary people showed such
extraordinary courage and certainly in
Dayton Ohio where in 30 seconds
one man guns down innocent people the
cops got there in one minute and it
still wasn't enough to save those people
that's what unites us you know what else
unites us and I'll tell you this what
unites us is that right now on Mitch
McConnell's desk our three bills
universal background checks closing the
Charleston loophole and passing my bill
to make sure that domestic abusers don't
get ak47 senators babies gonna get
and I personally think we should start
with the voluntary voluntary buyback
program that's what I think David but I
want to finish this because if you want
action now if you want action now we
gotta send the message to Mitch
McConnell we can't wait until one of us
gets in the White House we have to pass
those bills right now to get this done
senator Klobuchar it spare another
innocent life thank you thank you I want
to turn to Senator Booker because you
have said just this week about guns and
about the candidates on this stage that
the differences do matter those were
your words you have argued if you need a
license to drive a car in this country
you should have a license to buy a gun
gun owners would not only have to pass a
background check they would have to
obtain a federal license to buy a gun
this would require as you know Congress
to pass legislation if Democrats can't
get universal background checks how
would you get this done and can you name
one Republican colleague of yours in the
Senate right now who would be on board
with this idea so background checks and
gun licensing these are agreed to by
over whelming ly the majority for
Americans 83% of Americans agree with
licensing this is the issue look I grew
up in the suburbs it was about 20 years
ago that I came out of my home when I
moved to inner city Newark New Jersey
and witnessed the aftermath of a
shooting it's one of the reasons why
shooting after shooting after shooting
in neighborhoods like mine for decades
this has been a crisis for me it's why I
was the first person to come out for gun
licensing and I'm happy that people like
better or workers showing such courage
now and coming forward and also now
supporting licensing but this is what
I'm sorry about I'm sorry that it had to
take issues coming to my neighborhood or
personally affecting Beddoe to subtly
make us demand change this is a crisis
of empathy in our nation we are never
going to solve this crisis if we have to
wait for it to personally affect us or
our neighborhood our community before we
demand action you want to know how we
get this done we get this done by having
a more courageous empathy where people
don't wait for this hell to visit upon
their communities they stand up and
understand the truth of what King said
that injustice any
there is a threat to justice everywhere
but I will lead change on this issue
because I have seen what the carnage
creates in communities like mine because
we forget national shootings these mass
shootings are tragedies but the majority
of the homicide victims come from
neighborhoods like mine
nobody has ascended to the White House
that will bring more personal passion on
this issue I will fight this and bring a
fight to the NRA and the corporate gun
lobby like they have never seen before
senator Booker thank you a quick
follow-up though because Americans
watching tonight know the reality of
Congress in Washington I asked you have
a Republican colleague in the Senate who
would be on board with this idea to get
this done you know if that was the
attitude when Strom Thurmond had the
longest syllabub filibuster ever on
civil rights if it was this idea that we
can't get it done because of the
situation in the Senate I'm looking to
lead a movement the number one reason
why governments are formed is to protect
the citizenry think about this we have
had more people die due to gun violence
in my lifetime then every single war in
this country combined from the
Revolutionary War till now this is not a
side issue to me it is a central issue
to me that is the kind of fight because
the majority of homicide victims we've a
mass shooting every single day in
communities like mine we must awake at a
more courageous empathy in this country
so that we stand together and fight
together and overwhelm those Republicans
who are not even representing their
constituency because the majority of
Americans the majority of gun owners
agree with me not the corporate gun
lobby it is time for a movement on this
issue and I will lead it Thank You
senator Warren I want to you next
because you have actually said in recent
days that there are things you can get
done with Republicans in the Senate what
can you get done on gun control
so let's start by framing the problem
the right way we have a gun violence
problem in this country the mass
shootings are terrible but they got all
the headlines children die every day on
streets in neighborhoods on playgrounds
people die from violence from suicide
and domestic abuse
we have a gun violence problem in this
country and we agree on many steps we
could take to fix it my view on this is
we're gonna none it's not gonna be one
and done on this we're gonna do it and
we're gonna have to do it again and
we're going to have to come back some
more until we've taught the number of
gun deaths in this country significantly
but here's the deal the question we need
to ask is when we've got this much
support across the country 90% of
Americans want to see us do I like
registration want to see us do
background checks want to get assault
weapons off the ground off the streets
why doesn't it happen and the answer is
corruption pure and simple
we have a Congress that is beholding to
the gun industry and unless we're
willing to address that head-on and
rolling back the filibuster we're not
going to get anything done on guns I was
in the United States Senate when 54
senators said let's do background checks
let's get rid of his salt weapons and
with 54 senators it failed because of
the filibuster until we attack the
systemic problems we can't get done
reform in this country we've got to go
straight against the industry and we've
got to change Congress so it doesn't
just work for the wealthy and
well-connected so it works for the
people senator Warren thank you you
bring up eliminating the filibuster
which means you would need simply a
simple majority in a Republican Senate
to get something done I want to turn to
senator Sanders on this because you've
said before of this if Donald Trump
supports ending the filibuster which
he's talked about himself you should be
nervous
would you support ending the filibuster
no but what I would support absolutely
is passing major legislation the gun
legislation the people here are talking
about medicare-for-all climate change
legislation that saves the planet I will
not wait for 60 votes to make that
happen and you could do it in a variety
of ways you could do that through Budget
Reconciliation law you have a vice
president
will in fact tell the Senate what is
appropriate and what is not what is in
order and what is not but I want to get
back to a point that Elizabeth made and
that in fact in terms of gun issues and
picking up on Gauri and bado and
everybody else what we are looking at is
a corrupt political system and that
means whether it is the drug companies
or the insurance companies or the fossil
fuel industry determining what's
happening in Washington
or in this case you got an NRA which has
intimidated the President of the United
States and the Republican leadership
I am proud I am proud that year after
year I had an F rating from the NRA and
as president I will not be intimidated
by the NRA senator Sanders thank you
there's a lot about what's been
happening here in in Texas only a few
weeks ago the deadliest massacre of
Latinos Latinos in modern US history
happen in this state no paso so the fear
among Latinos and you know this is very
real so let me start with an issue that
is causing a lot of division in this
country immigration
Vice President Biden as a presidential
candidate in 2008 you supported the
border wall Shane unlike most Democrats
I voted for 700 miles of fence this is
what you said then you serve as vice
president in an administration that
deported 3 million people the most ever
in US history did you do anything to
prevent those deportations I mean you've
been asked this question before and
refused to answer so let me try once
again I referred to say tonight that you
and President Obama made a mistake about
the poor tations why should Latinos
trust you Latinos should look at is
comparing this president to the
president we have is outrageous number
one we didn't lock people up in cages we
didn't separate families we didn't do
all of those things number one I'm
to number two by the time this is the
president came along with the daca
program no one had ever done that before
mr. president sent a legislation to desk
saying he wants to find a pathway for
the 11 million undocumented in the
United States of America this the
president has done a great deal so I'm
proud to have served with him what I
would do as president is several more
things because things have changed I
would in fact make sure that there is we
immediately surged to the border all
those people are seeking asylum they
deserve to be heard that's who we are
we're a nation says if you want to flee
and your friend oppression you should
come
I would change the order that the
president just changed say women who
were being beaten and abused could no
longer claim that as a reason for asylum
and by the way retrospectively you know
the 25th anniversary of the Violence
Against Women Act is up the Republican
Congress has not reauthorized it let's
put pressure on them to pass the
Violence Against Women Act now you
didn't answer the question did you make
them no did you make a mistake with
those deportations the president did the
best thing that was able to be done it's
about you I'm the vice president and
state's secretary Castro would you want
to respond but you know and let me put
this in context because your party
controlled the White House and Congress
in 2009 and didn't pass immigration
reform and this broke a promise made by
President Barack Obama to Latinos so why
should voters Fross Democrats now I mean
now it is even more difficult as you
know because you need Republican votes
in the Senate so are you willing for
instance to give up daca or give up a
path to citizenship or even agree to
build a wall in order to legalize 10.5
million undocumented immigrants
Jorge thank you very much for that
question and you look I agree that
Barack Obama was very different from
Donald Trump Donald Trump has a dark
heart when it comes to immigrants he
built his whole political career so far
on scapegoating and fear-mongering and
authorizing migrants and that's very
different for Barack Obama but my
problem with Vice President Biden and
Cory pointed this out last time is every
time something good about Barack Obama
comes up he says oh I was there I was
there I was there that's me too
and then every time somebody questions
part of the administration that we were
both part of he says well that was the
president I mean he wants to take credit
for Obama's work but not have to answer
to any questions let me just say that I
would I was the first candidate in early
April to put forward an immigration plan
you know why because I'm not afraid of
Donald Trump on this issue I'm not gonna
backpedal I'm not gonna pretend like I
don't have a my own vision for
immigration so we're not going to give
up Dhaka we're not going to give up
protections for anybody I believe that
on January 20th 2021 we're gonna have a
Democratic president we're gonna throw
out Mitch McConnell and John Cornyn and
have a Democratic Senate and a
Democratic House and we're gonna pass
immigration reform within the first
hundred days as president 25 seconds
I did not say I don't stand I stand with
Barack Obama all eight years good bad
and indifferent that's where I stand I
did not say I did not stand with him
okay senator Warren hundreds of children
have been separated from their parents
at the border and recently in
Mississippi we saw the largest
immigration rate in a decade you want to
replace ice the agency in charge of
rounding up undocumented immigrants so
how would you deal with the millions of
immigrants who arrived legally what
overstay their visas and how would you
stop hundreds of thousands of Central
Americans who want to migrate to the US
well I start with a statement of
principles and that is in this country
immigration does not make us weaker
immigration makes us stronger I want to
see us expand legal immigration and
create a pathway to citizenship for our
dreamers but also for their grandparents
and for their cousins for people whose
overstayed student visas and for people
who came here to work in the fields I
want to have a system that is a path to
citizenship that is fair and achievable
down at the border we've got to rework
this entirely a system right now that
cannot tell the difference in the threat
posed by a terrorist a criminal and a 12
year old girl is not a system that is
keeping us safer and it is not serving
our values mr. young wait we need I want
to add one more part on this because I
think we have to look at all the pieces
why do we have a crisis at the border in
no small part because we have withdrawn
help from people in Central America who
are suffering we need to restore that
help we need to help establish and
re-establish the rule of law so that
people don't feel like they have to flee
for their lives we have a pricess that
Donald Trump has created and hopes to
profit from politically we have to have
the courage to stand up and fight back
mr. yang it is true that in the last few
years we have seen the most severe anti
measures from putting kids in cages to
limiting an asylum for people fleeing
gangs and domestic violence but it is
also true that about 1 million
immigrants enter the US legally every
year so are you willing to raise the
number of legal immigrants from 1
million to 2 million per year and should
there be a merit system as president
from bonds yeah he said it ok
sorry my my father grew up on a peanut
farm in Asia with no floor and now his
son is running for president that is the
immigration story that we have to be
able to share the American people if you
look at our history almost half of
Fortune 500 companies were founded by
their immigrants or children of
immigrants and rates of business
formation are much higher in immigrant
communities we have to say the American
people immigrants are positive for our
economic and social dynamism and I would
return the level of legal immigration to
the to the point it was under the
obama-biden administration I think we
have to compete for talent and I am the
opposite of Donald Trump in many ways he
says build a wall I'm going to say that
immigrants come to America because if
you come here your son or daughter can
run for president the water is great and
this is where you want to build a
company build a family and build a life
this country has been a magnet for human
capital for generations if we lose that
we lose something integral to our
continued success and that is where I
would lead as president I've got the pit
roundabout okay I can defeat eight out
of ten Latinos in Texas for another mass
shooting targeting them this is
according to a new Univision poem
president Rome has called Mexican
immigrants rapists and killers try to
ban Muslims from entering the country
and separated children from their
parents his supporters have chanted
build a wall and send her back
do you think that people who support
president from and his immigration
policies are racist anyone who supports
this is supporting racism as a
seismologist sincere
the only people though who actually buy
into this president's hateful rhetoric
around immigrants are people who don't
know any we have an opportunity to build
an American majority around immigration
reform in my community a group of
conservative Republicans rallied around
an individual a beloved local individual
who was deported when he went into ice
to try to get his paperwork sorted out
because they never thought it would
happen to him in some of the most
conservative rural areas of Iowa I have
seen communities that embraced
immigration grow and it's why part of my
plan for revitalizing the economies of
rural America
includes Community Renewal visas that
would allow cities and towns and
counties that are hurting not only for
jobs but for population to embrace
immigration as we have in my city you
know the only reason that South Bend is
growing right now after years of
shrinking is immigration it's one of the
reasons we acted not waiting for
Washington to create city issued
municipal IDs so the people regardless
of immigration status in our city had
the opportunity to have the benefits of
identification we have an opportunity to
actually get something done but we
cannot allow this to continue to be the
same debate with the same arguments and
the same clever lines often among the
same people since the last real reform
happened in the 1980s we have to
actually engage the American majority
around the opportunities for not just
growth in small communities but our
values values with welcomed values of
faith that all argue for us to manage
this humanely and in a way that marries
our values with our laws Congress Easter
veteran a preventable death in an
interview eight months ago you were
asked what to do with a so-called over
sales people who come with a recent
density and you said I don't know do you
have an answer now I do and if you read
the rest of that article in The
Washington Post I talked about
harmonizing our entry/exit system with
Mexico in the same way that we do with
Canada I think that could help us to
keep a handle on visa overstays but I
think the larger question that we're
trying to get at is how do we rewrite
this country's immigration laws in our
own image in the image of Houston Texas
the most diverse city in the
states of america in the image of El
Paso Texas one of the safest cities in
the United States of America safe not
despite the fact that we are a city of
immigrants safe because we are a city of
immigrants Cano somos Kasich Adamo's
asegurar nuestras comunidades us lopez
necesitamos strata cada persona con
respeto EDI nadar I will lead an effort
to make sure that we rewrite our
immigration laws in that way never caged
another child make sure that there is
accountability and justice for the seven
lives lost under our care and our
custody but also face the fact that
Democrats and Republicans alike voted to
build a wall that has produced thousands
of deaths of people trying to cross to
join family or to work a job that we
have been part of deporting people
hundreds of thousands just in the Obama
administration alone who posed no threat
to this country breaking up their
families Democrats have to get off the
back foot we have to lead on this issue
because we know it is right legalize
America begin with those more than 1
million dreamers make them US citizens
right now in this their true home
country and extend that to their parents
their sisters and their brothers and
ensure that we have a legal safe orderly
system to come to this country and add
to our greatness here turn now to NASA
security and the forum
that has such a direct impact here at
home the u.s. relationship with China
trade and president Trump's tariffs we
received more than a hundred questions
from viewers one you know how all of you
are gonna handle these tariffs see mr.
yang let me begin with you would you
repeal the tariffs on your first day in
office and if so would you risk losing
leverage in our trade relationship with
China
I would not repeal the tariffs on day
one but I would let the Chinese know
that we used to hammer out a deal
because right now the tariffs are
pummeling producers and farmers in Iowa
who are absolutely nothing to do with
the imbalances that we have with China a
CEO friend of mine was in China recently
and he said that he saw a pirated US
intellectual property on worker
workstations to the tune of thousands of
dollars per head and he said one how can
my workers compete against that and to
think about all the lost revenue to
American companies so the imbalances are
real but we have to let the Chinese know
that we recognize that President Trump
has pursued an arbitrary and haphazard
trade policy that has had victims on
both sides so no to repealing the
tariffs immediately but yes to making
sure we come to a deal that addresses
the the concerns of American companies
and American producers mayor Pete let me
take that question let me take that
question you because have you've seen
President Trump's tweets he says what's
going to happen here is the Chinese
eaters gonna wait him out so they can
get a Democrat who they can take
advantage of how do you think about
China we've seen President Trump call
President Xi both an enemy and a friend
well the president clearly has no
strategy you know when I first got into
this race
I remember President Trump scoffed and
said he'd like to see me making a deal
with Xi Jinping I'd like to see him
making a deal with Xi Jinping is it just
me or was that supposed to happen in
like April it's one more example of a
commitment not made when that happens on
the international stage people take note
not just our competitors our adversaries
but also our allies take note of the
inability of the United States to keep
its word or follow through on its plans
and when that happens there are serious
consequences we saw it at the g7 the
leaders of some of the greatest powers
and economies of the world sitting to
talk about one of the greatest
challenges in the world climate change
and there was literally an empty chair
where American leadership could have
been the problem is this is a moment
when American leadership is needed more
than ever
whether it's in Hong Kong where those
protesters for democracy need to know
that they have a friend in the United
States or anywhere around the world
where increasingly we see dictators
throwing their weight around the world
needs America but it can't be just any
American would you have the terrace I
would have a strategy that would include
the tariffs as leverage but it's not
about the terrace look what's going on
right now is the president who has
reduced the entire China challenge into
a question of of tariffs when what we
know is that the tariffs are coming down
on us more than anybody else and there's
a lack of a bigger stress then on Cobra
you've actually supported the tariffs on
steel what we've got right now though
George it's not a focus tariffs on steel
what he has done here he has assessees
tariffs on our allies he has put us in
the middle of this trade war and he is
treating our farmers and our workers
like poker chips in one of his bankrupt
casinos and if we are not careful he is
going to bankrupt this country one
forecast recently says that it has
already cost us 300,000 jobs all right
there is soybeans that are mounting up
in bins all over the Midwest in my state
of Minnesota and in Iowa so what I think
we need to do is to go back to the
negotiating table that's what I would do
I wouldn't have put all these tariffs in
place and I wouldn't have had a trade
policy where on August 1st he announces
he's going to have tariffs on 300
billion dollars of goods on August 13th
he cuts it in half a week later he says
he's going to reduce taxes the day after
that he says he's going to do it the
leaders of the world are watching this
and it undermines our strength as a
nation and yes we want fair trade but we
must work with the rest of the world and
he has made a mockery of focused trade
policy which I think means enforcement
like we've done in northern Minnesota
passing bills getting President Obama to
do more on that so that our workers can
benefit so we are
importing exporting goods and making
sure that is a competitive policy where
our goal is that we are making things
inventing things and exporting to the
world he is defeating that goal
secretary Cass are you actually in one
of the previous debates identified China
is the most serious national security
threat to our country I want to pick up
on what senator Klobuchar was saying
though she'd said she'd go back to the
negotiating table the question is what
do you do for leverage where do you get
it well look I agree with those who have
said that this erratic haphazard trade
war is hurting American families as
senator Klobuchar said 300,000 American
jobs
it's estimated that its cost $600 to the
average American family just a couple of
days ago 60% of Americans said that they
believe that were in for a recession
next year so when I become president I
would immediately begin to negotiate
with China to ratchet down that trade
war we have leverage there I also
believe though that we need to return to
a leader when it comes to things like
human rights we have millions of we Gers
for instance in China that right now are
being imprisoned and mistreated and in
North Korea this president is elevating
a dictator we need to stop that we need
to return to ensuring that America leads
again on human rights when it comes to
this trade war I would immediately begin
ratcheting that trade war down we have
leverage in that discussion senator
Warren let me bring you in on this this
conversation President Obama signed the
trans-pacific partnership in part it was
designed to rein in China to bring China
in to some kind of regulation what do
you think he got wrong so our trade
policy in America has been broken for
decades and it has been broken because
it works for giant multinational
corporations and not for much of anyone
else these are giant corporations that
shoot if they can save a nickel by
moving a job to a foreign country
they'll do it in a heartbeat
and yet for decades now who's been
whispering in the ears of our trade
negotiators who have shaped our trade
policy it's been the giant corporations
it's been
their lobbyists and their executives the
way we change our trade policy in
America is first the procedures who sits
at the table I want him to go she a
trade with unions at the table I want to
negotiate it with small farmers at the
table I want to negotiate it with
environmentalists at the table I wanted
to go she ate with human rights
activists at the table and you asked the
question about leverage if I can just
respond to that one the leverage are you
kidding everybody wants access to the
American market that means that we have
the capacity to say right here in
America you want to come sell goods to
American consumers and you got to raise
your standards you've got to raise your
labor standards and you've got to raise
your environmental standards so our
companies could compete on a level
playing field we can use trade not to
undermine American workers and not to
undermine American farms and not to
undermine small businesses in this
country we can use trade to help build a
stronger economy senator Harris how
would you how would your trade policy
different from President Obama's well
first of all I have no criticism of that
more than just looking at where we are
now which is that we've got a guy in the
White House who has been erratic on
trade policy he conducts trade policy by
tweet frankly born out of his fragile
ego it has resulted in farmers in Iowa
with soybeans rotting in bins looking at
bankruptcy when we look at this issue my
trade policy under Harris administration
is always going to be about saying we
need to export American products not
American jobs and to do that we have to
have a meaningful trade policy I am NOT
a protectionist Democrat look we need to
sell our stuff and that means we need to
sell it to people overseas that means we
need trade policies that allow that to
happen
you asked earlier about China it's a
complicated relationship we have to hold
China accountable they steal our
products including our intellectual
property they dub substandard products
into our economy they need to be held
accountable we also need to partner with
China on climate and the
that presents we need to partner with
China on the issue of North Korea I am
on and I think the only person on this
stage the Senate Intelligence Committee
in the Senate Homeland Security
Committee we need a partner on the issue
of North Korea but the bottom line is
this Donald Trump in office on trade
policy you know he reminds me of that
that guy in The Wizard of Oz you know
when you pull back the curtain it's a
really small dude
okay I'm not even gonna take the bait
there is a reason why in the last 45
years the average American today despite
an explosion of Technology and worker
productivity is not making a penny more
that he or she made 45 years ago and one
of the reasons is that for decades we
have had disastrous trade policies and I
gotta say to my good friend Joe Biden
Joe and I strongly disagree on trade I
helped lead the opposition the NAFTA
PNTR which cost this country over four
million good-paying jobs and what
happened is people who had those jobs
ended up getting other jobs making 50
percent of what they made in
manufacturing so Trump obviously has a
new clue
Trump thinks that trade policy is a
tweet at 3 o'clock in the morning what
we have got to do is develop a trade
policy that represents workers
represents the farmers in the Midwest
and elsewhere will losing billions right
now because of Trump's policy a trade
policy which understands that if a
companies shuts down in America and goes
abroad and then thinks they're gonna get
online to get a lucrative federal
contract under Bernie Sanders they got
other guests coming
Vice President Biden invoked your name
yeah well look we're they're gonna make
policy or China's gonna make the trade
the rules of the road we make up 25% of
the world economy we need another of 25%
to join us and I think Elizabeth senator
Warren is correct at the table has to be
Labour and ask the table have to be
environment
the fact of the matter is China the
problem isn't the trade deficit the
problem is they're stealing our
intellectual property the problem is
they're violating the WTO they're
dumping steel on us that's a different
issue than whether or not they're
dumping agricultural products on us in
addition to that we're in a position
where if we don't set the rules we in
fact they're going to find ourselves
with China setting the rules and that's
why you need to organize the world to
take on China to stop the corrupt
practices that are underway senator
Booker close out this room sure there's
one point we're really missing on the
stage right now which is the fact that
Donald Trump's America first policy is
actually in America isolated in America
alone policy from trade to battling
China to the crime global crisis of
climate change the challenges in the
Middle East he is pulling us away from
our allies out of the Iran deal out of
the Paris climate Accords and on trade
he's deciding to take on China while at
the same time taking on tariff battles
with all of our allies you literally
have him using a national security
waiver to put tariffs on Canada now look
I'm the only person on the stage that
finds Trudeau's hair very menacing but
they are not a national security threat
we cannot go up against China alone this
is a president has a better relationship
with dictators like do tart a and Putin
that he does with Merkel and Makran we
were the strongest nation on the planet
earth and our strength is multiplied and
magnified when we stand with our allies
in common cause and common purpose
that's how we beat China that's how we
beat climate change on the planet Earth
and that's how our American values are
the ones that lead on issues of Trade
and workers rights George thank you I
want to turn now to our troops overseas
into America's longest war in
Afghanistan u.s. talks with the Taliban
are dead according to the president
secret talks at Camp David have been
canceled before they could happen many
of you have waited on that already so I
want to move past that tonight to what
all of you have promised on the campaign
trail many of you on this stage have
said you'd bring the troops home in your
first term others have said in your
first year senator Warren we
all know the presidency is much
different from the campaign trail
President Obama wanted to bring the
troops home President Trump promised to
bring the troops home and you have said
of Afghanistan let's help them reach a
peace settlement it is time to bring our
troops home in your words starting right
now would you keep that promise to bring
the troops home starting right now with
no deal with the Taliban yes and I'll
tell you why what we're doing right now
in Afghanistan is not helping the safety
and security of the United States it is
not helping the safety and security of
the world it is not helping the safety
and security of Afghanistan we need to
bring our troops home and then we need
to make a big shift we cannot ask our
military to keep solving problems that
cannot be solved militarily we're not
going to bomb our way to a solution in
Afghanistan we need to treat the problem
of terrorism as a worldwide problem and
that means we need to be working with
all of our allies our European allies
our Canadian allies our Asian allies our
allies in Africa and in South America we
need to work together to root out
terrorism it means using all of our
tools it means economic investment it
means expanding our diplomatic efforts
instead of hollowing out the State
Department and deliberately making it so
we have no eyes and ears in many of
these countries we need a foreign policy
that is about our security and about
leading on our values senator Warren a
quick follow on that because top US
leaders military leaders on the ground
in Afghanistan told me you can't do it
without a deal with the Taliban you just
said you would you would bring them home
what if they told you that would you
would listen to their advice I was in
Afghanistan with John McCain two years
ago this past summer I think it may have
been Senator McCain's last trip before
he was sick and I talked to people we
did we talked to military leaders
American and local leaders we talked to
people on the ground
and ask the question the same one I
asked on the Senate Armed Services
Committee every time one of the generals
comes through show me what winning looks
like tell me what it looks like and what
you hear is a lot of home because no one
can describe it
and the reason no one can describe it is
because the problems in Afghanistan are
not problems that can be solved by a
military I have three older brothers who
have served in the military I understand
firsthand the kind of commitment they
have made they will do anything we ask
them to do but we cannot ask them to
solve problems that they alone cannot
solve we need to work with the rest of
the world we need to use our economic
tools we need to use our diplomatic
tools we need to build with our allies
and we need to make the whole world
safer not keep troops bombing in
Afghanistan etre Warren thank you I do
want to stay on this and I want to turn
to Mayor Buda judge because you're the
only veteran on this stage who served in
Afghanistan we heard in recent days from
General Joseph Dunford the chair of the
Joint Chiefs of Staff who said in recent
days I'm not going to use the word
withdrawal right now
it's our judgment the Afghans need
support to deal with a level of violence
if he's not even using the word
withdrawal would you put your promise to
bring troops home in the first year on
hold to follow the advice you know I
served under general Dunford way under
general Dunford in Afghanistan
and today September 12th 2019 means that
today you could be 18 years old old
enough to serve and have not been alive
on 9/11 we have got to put an end to
endless war and the way we do it is see
to it that that country will never again
be used for an attack against our
homeland and that does not require an
open-ended commitment of ground troops
let me say something else because if
there's one thing we've learned about
Afghanistan from Afghanistan it's that
the best way not to be caught up in
endless war is to avoid starting one in
the first and so when I am president an
authorization for the use of military
force will have a built-in three-year
sunset Congress will be required to vote
and a president will require be required
to go to Congress to seek an
authorization because if our troops can
summon the courage to go overseas the
least our members of Congress should be
able to do is summon the courage to take
a vote on whether they ought to be there
by the way we also have a president
right now who seems to treat troops as
props or worse tools for his own
enrichment we saw what's going on with
flights apparently being routed through
Scotland just so people can stay at his
hotels I'll tell you as a military
officer the very first thing that goes
through your mind the first time you
ever make eye contact with somebody that
you were responsible for in uniform is
do not let these men and women down this
president is doing exactly that I will
not mayor Buda judge thank you I want to
turn to Vice President Biden because the
concerns about any possible vacuum being
crated Britain being created in
Afghanistan if you pulled the US troops
out has been heightened by what we've
seen in recent days on the ground in
Iraq when you were Vice President
President Obama turned to you to bring
the troops home from Iraq you have said
on the campaign trail quote I made sure
the president turned to me and said Joe
get our combat troops out of Iraq there
was a major drawdown of US troops and
then Isis seized by some estimates 40
percent of the territory in Iraq he then
had to send thousands of troops back in
was it wrong to pull out of Iraq that
quickly and did the move actually help
Isis take hold
no it wasn't wrong to pull up I want to
answer Afghanistan question I've been in
and out of Afghanistan not with a gun
and I admire my friend for his service
but I've been out of Afghanistan I think
more than anybody on this on this and
it's an open secret you report a long
time ago George that I was opposed to
the surge in Afghanistan the whole
purpose of going to Afghanistan was to
not have a counter insurgency meaning
that we're gonna put that country
together it can not be put together let
me let me say it again it will not be
put together it's three different
countries Pakistan owns the three
counties there's the three provinces and
the East they're not in part of the
connie's run it I will go on and on but
here's the point the point is that it's
a counterterrorism strategy we can
prevent the United States from being the
victim of terror coming out of
Afghanistan by providing for bases and
assists the Pakistanis provide basis for
us so to airlift from and to move
against what we know we don't need those
troops there I would bring them home and
Joe dumb for it's a fine guy but this
has been an internal argument we've had
for eight years with regard to with
regard to Iraq the fact of the matter is
that you know I should have never voted
to give Bush authority to go in and do
what he said he was going to do the AUMF
was designed he said to go in and get
the Security Council to vote 15 to
nothing to allow inspectors to go in to
determine whether or not anything was
being done with chemical weapons or
nuclear weapons and when that happened
he went ahead and went anyway without
any of that proof I said something that
was not meant the way I said it I said
from that point on what I was argued
against in the beginning front once he
started to put the troops in was that in
fact we're doing it the wrong way
there was no plan we should not be
engaged we didn't have the people with
us we didn't have our lines we didn't
have allies with us etcetera and it was
later when we came to in office the
Barak turn the president turned to me
and said Joe when they said we had a
plan to get out he turned to the whole
Security Center
Joe will organize this get the troops
home my
son spent a year in Iraq and I
understand it made and we were right to
get the combat troops out the big
mistake that was made which we predicted
was that you would not have a
circumstance where the Shia and the
Kurds would work together to keep Isis
from coming from moving in mr. vice
president thank you I want to turn to
senator Sanders on this because the
concern over Afghanistan is very similar
to what we saw in Iraq when the troops
came out Isis filled that vacuum what do
you make of people out there who are
worried that if we pull out US troops
too quickly from Afghanistan it will
create safe haven all over again like
the plotters of 9/11 let me answer that
but let me just comment on something
that the vice president said you talked
about the big mistake in Iraq and the
surge the truth is the big mistake the
huge mistake and one of the big
differences between you and me I never
believed what Cheney and Bush said about
Iraq your voted against the war in Iraq
and helped lead the opposition and it's
sad to say I mean I kind of had the
feeling that there would be massive
destabilization in that area if we went
into that war is the former chairman of
the Senate Committee on Veterans Affairs
want to pick up on pizza we cannot
express our gratitude to all of the men
and women who have put their lives on
the line to defend them defend us who
have responded to the call of duty but I
think also I am the only person up here
to have voted against all three of
trumps military budgets I don't think we
have to spend 750 billion dollars a year
on the military when we don't even know
who our enemy is I think that what we
have got to do is bring this world
together bring it together on climate
change bring it together in fighting
against terrorism and make it clear that
we as a planet as a global community
will work together to help countries
around the world rebuild their
struggling economies and do everything
that we can to rid the world of
terrorism but dropping bombs on
Afghanistan and Iraq was not the way to
do it
senator Sanders thank you I want to take
this to mr. yang you share the stage as
you know when we talk about troops in
Iraq and Afghanistan with a vice
president who was in the Situation Room
with senators who are on the Senate
Armed Services the Foreign Relations
committees with an Afghanistan veteran
who is on the stage tonight as you share
the stage with these candidates what
makes you the most qualified on this
stage to be commander-in-chief I've
signed a pledge to end the forever wars
we've been in a state of continuous
armed conflict for 18 years but does not
the what the American people want we
have to start owning what we can and
can't do we're not very good at
rebuilding countries and if you want
proof all you have to do is look within
our own country of Puerto Rico
we've spent trillions of dollars to
unclear benefits lost thousands of lives
and thank you Pete for your service and
the goal has to be to rebuild the
relationships that have made America
strong for decades
I would lead our armed forces with
restraint and judgment what the American
people want is simply a president who
has the right values and point of view
and they can trust to make the right
decisions when it comes to putting our
young men and women into harm's way and
that's what I would do as president
mr. yang thank you for hey thank you
very much vamos a hablar de américa
latina you haven't been asked about
Latin American the previous debates so
let's begin
senator Sanders one country where many
immigrants are arriving from is
Venezuela a recent UN fact-finding
mission found that thousands had been
disappeared shorter and killed by
government forces in Venezuela you got
me that Venezuela does not have free
elections but still you refuse to call
Nicolas Maduro addicted or a dictator
can you explain why and what are the
main differences between your kind of
socialism and the one being imposed in
Venezuela Cuba and Nicaragua well first
of all let me be very clear anybody who
does what Maduro does is a
vicious tyrant what we need now is
international and regional cooperation
for free elections in Venezuela
so that the people of that country can
make it can create their own future
terms of democratic socialism to equate
what goes on in Venezuela with what I
believe is extremely unfair I'll tell
you what I believe in terms of
democratic socialism I agree with what
goes on in Canada and it's Scandinavia
guaranteeing health care to all people
as a human right I believe that the
United States should not be the only
major country on earth not to provide
paid family and medical leave I believe
that every worker in this country
deserves a living wage and that we
expand the trade union movement I happen
to believe also that what to me
democratic socialism means is we deal
with an issue we do not discuss in a way
not in the media and not in Congress you
got three people in America owning more
wealth than the bottom half of this
country you got a handful of
billionaires controlling what goes on in
Wall Street the insurance companies and
in the media maybe just B maybe what we
should be doing is creating an economy
that works for all of us not 1% that's
why understanding of democratic social
secretary I said you wanted to say
respond 45 seconds sure thank you for
hey I'll call Maduro dictator because he
is a dictator and what we need to do is
to along with our allies make sure that
the Venezuelan people get the assistance
that they need that we continue to
pressure Venezuela so that they'll have
free and fair elections and also here in
the United States offer temporary
protected status TPS to Venezuelans that
is something that the Trump
administration has failed to do for all
of his big talk about supporting the
Venezuelan American community he has
failed I will not I also believe that we
need to do things like a 21st century
Marshall Plan for Honduras El Salvador
and Guatemala so that people can find
safety an opportunity at home instead of
having to make the dangerous journey to
the United States and under my
administration we're gonna put renewed
focus on Latin America it makes sense
they're our neighbors and we have a lot
of things in common it also makes sense
that because we have a country like
China that is going around the world to
places like Africa and Latin America
making their own relationship
strengthening those the United States
need to strengthen its partnerships in
Latin America immediate leadership and I
will senator Booker let me ask you about
Brazil after the recent fires in the
Amazon some experts suggested that
eating less meat is one way to help the
environment you are a vegan since 2014
that's obviously a personal choice but
president from pan brazil's president of
also narrow are concerned that climate
change regulations could affect economic
role so shoot more americans including
those here in Texas and in Iowa follow
your diet you know first of all I want
to say no actually I want to translate
that into Spanish no
[Applause]
look on let's just be clear the factory
farming going on
that's assaulting this corporate
consolidation the agriculture industry
one of the reasons why I have a bill to
put a moratorium on this kind of
corporate consolidation is because this
factory farming is destroying and
hurting our environment and you see
independent family farmers being pushed
out of business because of the kind of
incentives we are giving that don't line
up with our values that's what I'm
calling for but I want to I want to
switch because we don't have karate to
debate stage we were talking about
Afghanistan and in Iraq it annoys me
that we had a conversation about our
troops overseas and we didn't say one
word about veterans in our country we
have a shameful reality in America that
we send people off to war and they often
come home with invisible wounds hurts
and harms they're disproportionately
homeless you hear stories about women
waiting for months for gynecological
care through the VA it is very important
that as we as a country understand that
we are not gonna solve every problem
with this outrageous increased
militarism that we also make sure that
we stand up for the people that stood
for us we end our national anthem with
home of the brave it's about time we
make this a better home for our bravest
congressman or or hurricane Harvey hit
this town two years ago and not only is
the Amazon burning Greenland is melting
at a record pace the last five years
have been the hottest ever recorded and
we have a viewers question about this
what meaningful action will you take to
reverse the effect of climate change and
can we count on you to follow through if
your donors are against it yes we will
follow through regardless of the
political consequences or who it offends
because this is the very future of our
planet and our ability for our children
and grandchildren to be able to survive
on it we will make sure that we get to
Net Zero greenhouse gas emissions no
later than the year 2050 that we are
halfway there by 2030 that we mobilize
five trillion dollars over the next ten
years to do that that we invest here in
Houston Texas with pre-disaster
mitigation grants to protect those
communities that are vulnerable to
flooding given the fact that this town
has seen three five hundred year floods
in just five years you'd like to think
you're good for 1500 years but you're
not they're coming faster and larger and
more devastating than ever we're also
going to make sure that we free
ourselves from a dependence on fossil
fuels and embrace renewable wind and
solar energy technology as well as the
high-paying high-skill high-wage jobs
that come along with that and then we're
gonna pay farmers for the environmental
services that they want to provide
planting cover crops keeping more land
under conservation using no-till farming
regenerative agriculture can pull carbon
out of the air and can drive it and
sequester it into the soil that's the
way that we're gonna meet this challenge
and we're gonna bring everyone into the
solution many of you want to comment
let's let's producing we can go very
fast senator Klobuchar thank you this is
the existential crisis of our time it's
you know that movie The Day After
Tomorrow it's today we have seen a
warming in our world like never before
we're seeing flooding in the Midwest
flooding in Houston fires in the West
and I think having someone leading the
ticket from the Midwest will allow us to
talk about this in a different way and
get it done on day one I will get us
back into the international climate
change agreement on day two I will bring
back the clean power rules that
President Obama had worked on day three
I will bring back the gas mileage
standards you can do all that without
Congress which is good on day four five
and six
I will working with Congress and mayors
and business people all over the country
introduced sweeping legislation to get
at that 2050 goal and on day seven years
most arrests but I won't senatorial we
need to do if we're gonna get at climate
change we have to take this on as a
crisis that's happening right now and
it's a warrant route American foreign
policy be base are on the principle of
climate change yes we need to work on
every front on climate change it is the
threat to every living thing on this
planet and we are running out of
every time the scientists go back they
say we have less and less time than we
thought we had
but that means we've got to use all the
tools one of the tools we need to use
are our regulatory tools I have proposed
following governor Inslee that we by
2028 cut all carbon emissions from new
buildings by 2030 carbon emissions from
cars and by 2035 all carbon emissions
from the manufacture of electricity that
alone those three will cut our emissions
here in the United States by 70% we can
do this we also need to help around the
world to clean but understand this one
more time why doesn't it happen as long
as Washington is paying more attention
to money that it is to our future we
can't make the changes we need to make
we have to attack the corruption head-on
so that we can save our planet
senator Ohio is 45 seconds when I think
about this issue it really is through
the lens of my baby nieces who are one
and a half and three years old when I
look at what is gonna be the world if we
do nothing when they turn 20 I am really
scared and when I've been in the United
States Senate for now the last two and a
half years and I look at our
counterparts the Republicans in the
United States Senate they must be
looking at their children and then when
they look at the mirror I don't know
what they see but it's a lack of courage
and this this is an issue that yes it
represents an existential threat it is
also something we can do something about
this is a problem that was created by
human behaviors and we can change our
behaviors in a way that saves our planet
I've seen it happen in California I took
on as the Attorney General of California
I ran the second largest department of
justice in the United States second only
to the United States Department of
Justice I took on the big oil companies
and we saw progress if any of you have
been to Los Angeles 20 years ago you'll
remember that sky was brown
you go there now the sky is blue and you
know why because leader just decided to
lead and we took on these big fossil
fuel companies we have some of the most
important and strongest laws in the
country and we made a difference in my
point being I've done it before and I
will lead as president on this issue
because we have no time the clock is
tipping ticking but we need courage and
we need courageous leadership we can get
this done
mr. yang so to follow up on what
Elizabeth said why are we losing to the
fossil fuel companies why are we losing
to the gun lobby in the NRA and the
answer is this we all know everyone on
the stage knows that our government has
been overrun by money and corporate
interests now everyone here has a plan
to try and curb those corporate
interests but we have to face facts
money finds away money will find its way
back in so what is the answer the answer
is to wash the money out with
people-powered money my proposal is that
we give every American a hundred
democracy dollars that you can only give
to candidates and cause that you like
this would wash out the lobbyists cash
by a factor of eight to one that is the
only way we will win and as someone
running for president I'll tell you
there's a people on one side and the
money on the other the only way for us
to win is if we bring them together
thank you mister yeah
[Applause]
now about education mr. gang will stay
with you here in Houston the school
district is facing yet another year of
spending cuts like schools across the
country the system faces many challenges
one of them thousands of students are
leaving traditional public schools and
going to charter schools
you're the most vocal proponent on this
stage for charter schools you've said
that Democrats who want to limit them
are quote just jumping into bed with
teachers unions and doing kids a
disservice
why isn't taxpayer money better spent on
fixing traditional public schools let me
be clear I am Pro good school
I've got a kid one of my little boys
just started public school last week and
I was not there because I was running
for president so we need to pay teachers
more because the data clearly shows that
a good teacher is worth his or her
weight and gold
we need to lighten up the emphasis on
standardized tests which do not measure
anything fundamental about our character
or human work but here's the big one the
data clearly shows that 65 to 70 percent
of our students outcomes are determined
outside of the school we're talking
about time spent at home with the
parents words read to them when they're
young stress levels in the house income
type of neighborhood we're putting money
into schools and educators know this
we're saying you're a hundred percent
responsible for educating our kids but
you can only control 30 percent they all
know this the answer is to put money
directly into the families and
neighborhoods to give our kids a chance
to learn and our teachers a chance to
teach now Ruby just 35 seconds to us
step one is appoint a Secretary of
Education who actually believes in
public education
I believe in public education and in
order to strengthen it some things are
very complex for preparing for a future
where knowledge is at your fingertips
but we got to teach more to do with
critical thinking and social and
emotional learning some of it is
extremely simple we've just got to pay
teachers more and we've got to lift up
the teaching profession I was think of a
story from South Bend of friends who
hosted exchange students from Japan they
had a student one year who wanted to be
a teacher and they kept in touch with
her when she went back to Japan into
college she took the exam to try to
become a teacher in a society that
really regards teachers and compensates
teacher as well and she came up just
short so you know what she did since she
was academically good but couldn't quite
make the cut to be a teacher she had a
fall black fallback plan she became a
doctor that is how seriously some
countries treat the teaching profession
if we want to get the results that we
expect for our children we have to
support and compensate the teaching
profession respect teachers the way we
do soldiers and pay them more like the
way we do doctors senator warren to use
mr. Yang's term are you just jumping
into bed with teachers unions you know I
think I'm the only person on this stage
who has been a public school teacher
school teacher since I was in second
grade and let's be clear in all the ways
we talk about this money for public
schools should stay in public schools
not go anywhere
I've already made my commitment I will
we will have a Secretary of Education
who has been a public school teacher I
think this is ultimately about our
values I have proposed a two-cent wealth
tax on the top one-tenth of 1% in this
country that would give us enough money
to start with our babies by providing
Universal childcare for every baby age 0
to 5 universal pre-k for every
three-year-old and four-year-old in this
country thank you so is the wages of
every childcare worker and preschool
teacher in this country cancel student
loan debt for 95% of the folks at Thank
You senator strengthen our unions this
is how we build an America that reflects
our values not just where the money
comes from with the billionaire's in
corporate exec senator Harris 45 seconds
we spun my first grade teacher mrs.
Francis Wilson god rest her soul
attended my law school graduation I
think most of us would say that we are
not where we are without the teachers
who believed in us I have offered in
this campaign a proposal to deal with
this which will be the first in the
nation for federal investment in closing
the teacher pay gap which is thirteen
thousand five hundred dollars a year
because right now in our public schools
our teachers ninety four percent of them
are coming out of their own pocket to
help pay for school supplies and that is
wrong I also want to talk about where we
are here at TSU and what it means in
terms of HBCUs I have as part of my
proposal that we will put two trillion
dollars into investing in our HBCUs for
teachers because because because one as
a proud graduate of a historically black
college and university
I will say I will say that it is our
HBCUs that disproportionately produce
teachers and those who serve in these
many professions but on the senator but
this is a critical point if a black
child has a black teacher before the end
of third grade there are 13 percent more
likely to go to college if that child
has had two black teachers before the
end of third grade there are 32 percent
more likely to go to college so when we
talk about investing in our public
education system it is at the source of
so much when we fix it that will fix so
many other things we must invest in the
bank several senators and I strongly
believe you can judge a society based on
how it treats its children and we are
facing on this issue
[Applause]
guess what you're guessing alright
here's the answer we are the wealthiest
country in the history of the world and
yet we have the highest child poverty
rate of almost any country on earth we
have teachers in this country who are
leaving education because they can't
work two or three jobs to support
themselves which is why under my
legislation we'll move to see that every
teacher in America makes at least
$60,000 a year what we will also do is
not only have universal pre-k we will
make public colleges and universities
and HBCUs debt-free and what we will
also do because this is an incredible
burden on millions millions of young
people who did nothing wrong except try
to get the education they need we are
going to cancel all student debt in this
country by imposing a tax on Wall Street
speculation Thank You senator mr. vice
president
to you and talk to you about inequality
in schools and race in a conversation
about how to deal with segregation in
schools back in 1975 you told a reporter
I don't feel responsible for the sins of
my father and grandfather I feel
responsible for what the situation is
today for the sins of my own generation
and I'll be damned if I feel responsible
to pay for what happened 300 years ago
you said that some 40 years ago but as
you stand here tonight what
responsibility do you think that
Americans need to take to repair the
legacy of slavery in our country well
they have to deal with in the book there
is institutional segregation in this
country and from the time I got involved
I started dealing with that redlining
banks making sure that we are in a
position where look talk about education
I propose that what we take is those
very poor schools the title one schools
triple the amount of money we spend from
fifteen to forty five billion a year
give every single teacher a race of
equal race of getting out the $60,000
level number to make sure that we bring
into the helpless astutely the teachers
deal with the problems that come from
home the problems that come from home we
need we have one school psychologist for
every 1,500 kids in America today it's
crazy
the teachers are a kind I'm married to a
teacher my deceased wife is a teacher
they have every problem coming to them
we make sure that every single child
does in fact have three four and
five-year-olds go to school school not
daycare school we bring social workers
into homes and parents to help them deal
with how to raise their children it's
not that they'll want to help they don't
want they don't know quite what to do
play the radio make sure the television
the excuse me make sure you have the
record player on at night the phone make
sure the kids hear words a kid coming
from a very poor school or a very poor
background will hear four million words
fewer spoken by the time they get there
there's so much no I'm gonna go like the
rest of them do twice over okay
here's the deal the deal is that we've
got this little backwards and by the way
in Venezuela we should be allowing
people to come here from Venezuela I
know Medora I've confronted Medora
number two you talked about the need to
do something in Latin America I'm the
guy that came up with seven hundred and
forty million dollars to see to it those
three countries in fact changed their
system so people don't have a chance to
leave y'all actin like we just
discovered this yesterday Thank You mr.
vice president secretary Castro thank
you very much well that's that's quite a
lot but you know I grew up in one of
those neighborhoods that folks have
talked about in a neighborhood that was
grappling with the legacy of segregation
in fact into public school districts
that were involved in a 1973 Supreme
Court case challenging how Texas
financed its schools and I know that
today our schools are segregated because
our neighborhoods are segregated now I
have an education plan like a lot of
folks up here that would pay teachers
more that would recruit diverse ranks of
teachers that would invest in our public
schools but I also believe that we have
to connect the dots to uplift the
quality of life to invest in housing
opportunity to invest in job opportunity
to invest in community schools that
offer resources like parents able to go
back and get their GED and healthcare
opportunities and those things that
truly truly ensure that the entire
family can prosper those are the types
of things that we need to do in addition
to lifting up our public schools you
asked a second ago about charter schools
look it is a myth that charter schools
are better than public schools they're
not
and secretary well I'm not categorically
against charter schools I would require
more transparency and accountability
from them than it's required right now
senator Booker coming to get out it was
sixty five years ago this year that the
Supreme Court outlawed racial
segregation in public schools yet for
millions of students of color today's
segregation remains a reality non-white
districts typically received $2,200 less
per student than those in white
districts this means older books less
access to computers and often worse
outcomes what is your plan to address
segregation and I'm not just talking
about the achievement gap but I'm
talking about the opportunity gap in
education so I'm hearing a lot of
conversations on the stage that and the
way we talk about communities of color
look I live in a black and brown
community below the poverty line
I've lived in public housing projects
almost for a decade and saw the anguish
of parents who are just so deeply
frustrated that they don't have a school
that serves their genius I think I'm the
only person on the stage even though I
had no formal authority as mayor to run
a school system I stepped up and took
responsibility for our schools and we
produce results a lot of folks here
talking about raising teacher salary we
actually did it in Newark New Jersey and
we didn't stop the hair yeah we closed
poor performing charter schools but
dagnabbit we expanded high-performing
charter schools we were a city that said
we need to find local solutions that
work for our community the results speak
for themselves we're now the number one
city in America for beat the odds
schools from high poverty to high
performance strategies like investing in
our children work and I'll tell you this
I am tired of us thinking about these
problems isolated disconnected from the
other issues that's why my friend
secretary Castro is a hundred percent
right we are in the reality we are right
now because vice president overtly
racist policies not 400 years ago just
in my lifetime that we're redlining
communities dis investing in communities
and more than just that my kids are not
only struggling with racial segregation
and housing and the challenges of
underfunded schools but they're also
chata struggling with environmental
injustice
if you've talked to someone who's a
parent of a child has had permanent
brain damage because of lead you'll know
this is a national problem because
there's over three thousand
jurisdictions in America where children
have more than twice the blood lead
levels of Flint Michigan thank you so if
I'm president United States it is a
holistic solution to education from
raising teacher salary fully funded
special education but combating the
issues of poverty combating the issues
of racial segregation combating the
issues of a criminal justice system it
takes parents away from their kids and
dealing with environmental justice as a
major pillar of any climate policy and
we are back now for a final round of
questions one question for each
candidate we're going to reverse order
from the opening statement and
candidates the question is on the
quality of resilience no president can
succeed without resilience every
president confronts crises defeats and
mistakes so I want to ask each of you
what's the most significant professional
setback you've had to face how did you
recover from it and what did you learn
from it Vice President Biden I I never
counted any professional setback I have
as a serious setback there's things that
are important things are not important
[Applause]
[Music]
we're going to clear the protesters now
this one minute
[Applause]
[Music]
senator Biden will start the clock again
[Applause]
[Music]
I'm sorry we're sorry go ahead there's
setbacks in there setbacks and I think
the most critical setback that can occur
to anyone is to lose well my dad had an
expression said Joey it's not a question
of succeeding and whether you get
knocked down and so quickly get up and
and you say never explained and never
complain did I go on to say that the
only obligation that really matters the
most important thing is family it so I
was raised to believe that that was the
center of everything family and I could
be judged on based how you treat your
family and and how you went from there
and I took you know Kierkegaard
said faith sees best in the dark right
after I got elected my wife and daughter
were killed in an automobile accident oh
my and my my two sons are badly injured
and I just been elected not sworn in and
I lost my faith for a while
I came back and then later when my son
Beau came home for a canned with a
terminal disease and a year later a year
and a half later losing him was like
losing part of my soul but the fact is
that I learned that the way you deal
with it is you deal with finding purpose
purpose in what you do and that's why I
hope I hope he's proud of me today
because he wanted to make sure I didn't
run for president but I stayed engaged
because when you get hit badly
whether you're losing a job or you're
raising a family like my dad where you
have to make that longest walk up the
stairs to tell your kid you can't live
here anymore dad lost his job you know
we've all went through that some form or
another and it just takes it just for me
the way I've dealt with it is finding
purpose and my purpose is do what I've
always tried to do and stay engaged in
public policy and but there's a lot of
people and through a lot worse than I
have get up every single morning put
their feet one foot in front of another
without the help I had the real heroes
out there president Senator Warren
I mentioned earlier I've known what I
wanted to be since second grade I wanted
to be a public school teacher and I
invested early I used to line my dollies
up and teach school I had a reputation
for being tough but fair
by the time I graduated from high school
my family didn't have money for a
college application much less to send me
off to four years at a university and my
story like a lot of stories has a lot of
twists and turns got a scholarship and
then at 19 got married dropped out of
school took a minimum-wage job
thought my dream was over I got a chance
down the road at the University of
Houston and I made it as a special needs
teacher I still remember that first year
as a special needs teacher I could tell
you what those babies looked like I had
four to forty six year olds but at the
end of that first year I was visibly
pregnant and back in the day that meant
that the principal said to me we should
be luck and hired someone else for the
job so there I am I'm at home I got a
baby I can't have a job what am I gonna
do here's resilience the law school and
the consequence was I practice law for
about 45 minutes and then went back to
my first love which is teaching but let
me get into fights it gave me new tools
and the reason I'm standing here today
is because I got back up I fought back I
know what's broken I want to be in the
fight to fix it in America thank you sir
senator Sanders
me means growing up in a rent-controlled
apartment in Brooklyn New York the son
of an immigrant who came to this country
without a nickel in his pocket
professional resilience means to be
judged running for US Senate in Vermont
getting 1% of the vote
running for governor and getting 2% of
the vote finally becoming mayor a
Burlington Vermont with ten vote margin
what resilience means to me is that
throughout my political career I have
taken on virtually every powerful
special interest in this country whether
it is Wall Street whether it is the
insurance industry whether it is the
pharmaceutical industry whose corruption
and greed is killing people today
whether it is a military industrial
complex or a prison industrial complex
and I feel confident that given a
lifelong record I've taken on powerful
special interests of standing up for the
working families of this country that I
will be able to take on the greed and
corruption of the corporate elite and
create a government and an economy that
works for all of us not just the 1%
Thank You senator Sanders senator Harris
you know every office I've run for
whether it be district attorney or
Attorney General I was told each time it
can't be done they said nobody like you
has done it before you're nobody is
ready for you when I ran for da I won
and became the first black woman elected
DA in a state of 40 million people in
San Francisco when I ran for attorney
general of California I was elected
I didn't listen and I was the only black
elected woman black elected Attorney
General in the state in the country and
each time people would say it's not your
time it's not your turn it's going to be
too difficult they're not ready for you
and I didn't listen and a part of it
probably comes from the fact that I was
raised by a mother who said many things
that were life lessons for me including
don't you ever let anybody tell you who
you are you tell them who you are and
when I look around the town halls that
we do in this race for president United
States and I look at the the the
meetings that we do in the community
meetings and I see these little girls
and boys sometimes even brought by their
fathers and they bring them to me and I
talked to them at during these events
and they smile and they're full of joy
and their fathers tell them see don't
you ever listen and let anybody ever
tell you what you can or cannot be you
have to believe in what can be
unburdened by what has been senator
Harris thank you very much mayor bootie
judge you know as military officers
serving under Don't Ask Don't Tell
and as an elected official in the state
of Indiana when Mike Pence was governor
at a certain point when it came to
professional setbacks I had to wonder
whether just acknowledging who I was was
going to be the ultimate career-ending
professional setback I came back from
the deployment and realized that he only
get to live once and I was not
interested in not knowing what it was
like to be in love any longer so I just
came out I had no idea what kind of
professional setback it would be
especially because inconveniently it was
an election year in my socially
conservative community what happened was
that when I trusted voters to judge me
based on the job that I did for them
they decided to trust me and reelected
me with 80% of the vote and what I
learned
was that trusts can be reciprocated and
that part of how you can win and deserve
to win is to know what's worth more to
you than winning and I think that's what
we need in the presidency right now we
have to know what we are about and this
election is not about any of us up here
it is not about this president even
though it's hard to talk of anything
else some days it's about the people who
trust us with their lives a kid
wondering if we're actually going to
make their schools safe when they've
learned active shooter drills before
they've learned to read a generation
wondering whether we will actually get
the job done on climate change and if we
hold to that then it doesn't matter what
happens to each of us professionally
together we will win a better era for
our country Nambu the judge thank you
miss yang I was an unhappy lawyer for
five whole months and I left to start a
business and I'm gonna share with you
all one of the secrets to
entrepreneurship if you want to start
something tell everyone you know you're
going to do it and then you don't have a
choice you put your heart and soul into
it and even though I did that my company
flopped had its mini rise and maximum
fall
I lost investors hundreds of thousand
dollars still owed a hundred thousand in
school debt my parents still told people
I was a lawyer it's a little easier so I
remember lying lying on my floor looking
up wondering how'd it come to this
eventually I picked myself back up I
kept working in small growth companies
for another ten years and eventually had
some success then after I did have some
success I still remembered how hard it
was how isolating it was how it feels
like your friends no longer want to
spend time with you and so I spent seven
years starting and running a nonprofit
that helped train young entrepreneurs
around the country including Shaun when
who's here in the audience tonight who
left left his gilded Wall Street job to
be to become a food entrepreneur in San
Antonio Sean I hope I made the process a
little bit easier for you than it was
for me but the goal of my campaign is to
make this an economy that allows us to
live our human values and aspirations
thank you thank you mr. yang
so my biggest professional setback is
embarrassing because a lot of folks know
about it I with a bunch of tenant
leaders in Newark New Jersey in 2002
took on the political machine and boy
did they fight back I had tires on my
car / or campaign offices were broken
into my phones were tapped it became a
spectacle and we lost that election and
here's a bit of advice everybody if
you're gonna have a spectacular failure
have a documentary team there to capture
it because it made for an
oscar-nominated documentary called
street fight but then unfortunately
another setback it lost in the Oscars to
a movie called march of the dagnab
penguins for crying out loud the people
in my community living in the projects
told me don't give up on the people and
the people won't give up on you create
bigger and bolder coalition's and you're
gonna win and you know what we came back
four years later and one the largest
lopsided victory in our city's history
but more than that the lesson was there
we didn't give up we were taking on
America's toughest problems from crime
to poverty and we transformed our city
creating tens of thousands of new jobs
the biggest economic expansion in our
city and as I said before turned around
our school system there's more work to
do but I haven't given up on the people
I still live in that community but this
is the big lesson my staff and my
friends and my community told me if you
want to go fast you may have won the
mayor's race but that's not what life is
about there's an old African saying that
says if you want to go fast go alone but
if you want to go far go together the
lesson I learned of resilience is to
trust people because the power of the
people is always greater than the people
in power and the tests of America right
now it's not a referendum on Donald
Trump it's a referendum on us and who we
are and who we're gonna be together we
need to use this moment in history to
unite in common cause and common purpose
and then there's nothing we can't do
together as a nation senator Booker
thank you
Patterson award thank you George
everything that I've learned about
resilience I've learned from my hometown
of El Paso Texas in the face of this act
of terror that was directed at our
community in large part by the President
of the United States that killed 22
people and injured many more we were not
defeated by that nor were we defined by
that the very thing that drew that
killer to us is the very thing that
helps us set the example for the rest of
this country we don't see our
differences as disqualifying or
dangerous we see them as foundational to
our success to our strength and to our
security and to our safety
yesterday I was visiting with one of
those victims he's the head coach of the
fusion this is a girls soccer team of 10
and 11 year old girls his name is Luis
he was shot in the legs multiple times
he was shot in the side multiple times
he's still healing from his wounds in
the hospital but from his hospital bed
he's still trying to coach the fusion
girls soccer team memo his co coach is
still fighting for his life
right now at Del Sol Hospital those two
men Jessica and Marcela their wives they
exemplify resilience to me and and when
we end this scourge of gun violence in
this country when we finally confront
the racism that exists in America when
we're defined not by our fears but
instead by our aspirations and our
ambitions it will be in large part I
think thanks to the example that El Paso
has said Thank You senator club which
are
my challenges and resilience have
brought me up here I grew up with the
dad who struggled with alcoholism his
whole life and after his third DWI he
had a choice between jail and treatment
he chose treatment with his faith with
his friends with our family and in his
words he was pursued by grace and that
made me interested in public service
because I feel like everyone should have
that same right to be pursued by grace I
then got married my husband's out there
somewhere hopefully smiling and our
daughter and our daughter was born I had
this expectation we're gonna have this
perfect perfect birth and she was really
sick and she couldn't swallow and she
was in out of hospitals for a year and a
half but when she was born they had a
rule in place that you got kicked out of
the hospital in 24 hours she was in
intensive care and I was kicked out and
I thought this could never happen to any
other mom again so I went to the
legislature our state legislature not an
elected official and mom and I advocated
for one of the first laws in the country
guaranteeing new moms and their babies
of 40 at our hospital state and when
they tried to delay the implementation
of that law I brought six Fred pregnant
friends to the conference committee so
they outnumbered the lobbyists two to
one and when they said when should it
take place they all raised their hand
and said now that is what motivated me
to go into public service and when I got
to that gridlock of Washington DC and
got to work and pass over a hundred
bills and I know a lot of my friends
here from the left but remember I am
from the middle of the country and I
believe if we're gonna get things done
that we have to have someone leading the
ticket with grit someone's going to not
just change the policies but change the
tone in the country and someone who
believes in America and believes it from
their heart because of where they came
from that everyone should have that same
opportunity senator thank you secretary
Castro
and thank you George to hold head to
Lindsay and to David and all of y'all
for tuning in tonight in many ways I
shouldn't be here on this stage you know
gastro is my mother's name and was my
grandmother's name before her I grew up
in a single-parent household on the west
side of San Antonio going to the public
schools eventually my brother Joaquin
and I became the first in our family to
become professionals and when I got home
I took a job at the biggest law firm in
town I was making $100,000 a year in the
year 2000 a few months later I got
elected to the San Antonio City Council
and the City Council at the time was
only paying a thousand 40 dollars a year
so everybody had another job and my job
was at the law firm well a few months
after I got elected the law firm got a
client and the client wanted those of us
on the City Council to vote for a land
deal the land deal was that they wanted
to build a golf course over our water
supply because we relied on an
underground aquifer I didn't think the
Environmental Protection Plan was strong
enough so I wanted to vote against it
and my constituents wanted me to vote
against it but under the ethics rules
for lawyers in Texas because believe it
or not lawyers have ethics rules you
can't just go against the interests of a
client so I was stuck on the one hand I
wanted to do the right thing on the
other hand my livelihood my student
loans my new house payment my car
payment depended on me shutting up being
conflicted out so one day I walked into
my law firm and I quit my job and then I
went and I voted against that land deal
on the City Council
you know it was the first test that I
had and I think back to that because
often times we think of politics and you
think of politics is dirty or corrupting
I wondered before I went in it whether
it would change who I was and I was
proud that when that first test came
that I stood up for the people that I
was there to represent and not for big
special interests there's nobody that
gets tested more in a position of public
trust than the President of the United
States this president has failed that
test but I want you to know that if you
elect me president I won't
I won't serve anybody except you and
your family and together we can create
on America that's better than ever thank
you very much Castro thank you to all
candidates there's a great debate I
think we learned a lot tonight thanks to
you thanks to Texas Southern University
for hosting us tonight it was a great
crowd
[Applause]